<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>An Account of the Life and Writings of S. Irenæus, Bishop of Lyons and Martyr</title>
      <author><name reg="Beaven, James">James Beaven</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>May 8, 2018</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">57119</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
        most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
        whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
        the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
        www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
        to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2018-05-08">May 8, 2018</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Richard Hulse, Bryan Ness, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This book was produced from scanned images of public domain material from
            the Google Books project.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">An Account</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Of The</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Life and Writings</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Of</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">S. Irenæus,</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Bishop of Lyons and Martyr:</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Intended to Illustrate</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Doctrine, Discipline,
Practices, and History of the Church, and the Tenets and Practices of the Gnostic Heretics,
During the Second Century.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">James Beaven, M.A.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Of St. Edmund Hall, Oxford</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">And Curate of Leigh, in the County of Stafford.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London:</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">J. G. F. &amp; J. Rivington</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1841</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
    <figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>

</div>

<pb n='iii'/><anchor id='Pgiii'/>

<div>
<head>Dedication.</head>

<p>
To the Memory
</p>

<p>
Of
</p>

<p>
Edward Burton, D.D.
</p>

<p>
Late Regius Professor Of Divinity In The University Of Oxford,
</p>

<p>
By Whose Advice And Encouragement
</p>

<p>
The Author Of This Work
</p>

<p>
Was First Led To Study, With Care And Attention,
</p>

<p>
The Writings Of
</p>

<p>
This Father and Martyr.
</p>

<p>
It Is Now Dedicated And Inscribed;
</p>

<p>
As A Humble Acknowledgement Of His Extensive Learning,
</p>

<p>
His Remarkable Singleness Of Mind,
</p>

<p>
And The Cordial Assistance He Ever Rendered
</p>

<p>
To Younger Travellers
</p>

<p>
In The Same Path Which He Himself Pursued.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
It was, perhaps, somewhat presumptuous in a person
occupying so humble a station in the sacred ministry to
offer to the Church a work which would necessarily induce
comparisons between itself and the similar productions of
a Prelate of the Church&mdash;a Divine of the highest rank and
character. The author can, however, at least say, that it
was no foolish ambition which led to his employing himself
on such a work. Having been led by circumstances to a
repeated perusal and study of the writings of S. Irenæus,
he saw the great value of his testimony to the leading principles
and doctrines of the Church of England. He had
himself derived much benefit from the works of Bishop
Kaye on others of the Fathers; he thought that if he
could do nothing more than to draw out the substance of
the doctrine and opinions of Irenæus for the use of the
student in theology, in a more accessible form than that in
which he himself had to look for it, accompanied by the
text of the portions from which he had formed his statements,
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
and with a little illustration of the meaning in
passages liable to misunderstanding,&mdash;he should have rendered
a service to his younger brethren: and if it should
so happen that that distinguished Prelate or any other
writer did anticipate him, it would be so much clear gain to
himself to have been so employed. When he had completed
his first preparations, and had learnt by proper
inquiry that the Illustrator of Justin, Clement, and Tertullian
was not engaged on Irenæus, he endeavoured to put
the work somewhat into form: and being afterwards
encouraged by one upon whose judgment and acquirements
public opinion had set its stamp, and who had seen portions
of the work, to believe that it possessed a certain degree of
value,&mdash;he ventured to bring it into public notice in the
only way which appeared open to him.
</p>

<p>
He desires here to record his sense of the most kind
and most hearty encouragement he has met with from
persons of all ranks and classes, capable of appreciating a
work of this description, or of aiding in its publication:
more especially of that afforded him by her Majesty <hi rend='smallcaps'>The
Queen Dowager</hi>, by the Most Reverend and Right Reverend
Prelates who have honoured him with their support,
by the many persons distinguished either for station or for
literary eminence, whose names will be found in the subjoined
list, and by the warm-hearted friends, both of the
clergy and of the laity, with whom he is either locally or
personally connected.
</p>

<p>
His work, such as it is, he now sends forth, trusting
that, through the blessing of the Divine <hi rend='smallcaps'>Head</hi> of the
Church, it may be available to the great ends of the
<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>
ministry to which he has been called, and may tend to the
unity, the strength, and the stability of the Church.
</p>

<p>
Before, however, he takes his leave of his readers, he
wishes to add a few words on the Right Use of the
Writings of the Fathers.
</p>

<p>
1. We use them as we do the writings of secular authors,
to ascertain the <emph>facts</emph> of the <emph>history</emph> of their own or of preceding
times; principally as concerning the Church, and
secondarily as concerning the world. To this use of them
no objection in principle can be raised; and in so doing, we
treat them exactly as we do ordinary writers.
</p>

<p>
2. We use them, as <emph>evidence</emph> of the state of the Church,
in their own and preceding ages, as regards either <emph>discipline</emph>
or <emph>morals</emph>. In regard to the former, as it is a thing not in
its nature liable to hasty alteration,&mdash;discipline established
in one age continuing on, for the most part, into the next,&mdash;their
testimony will avail for the immediately preceding
generation, as well as for their own. In regard to the
latter, it can scarcely be received for any thing anterior to
their own age, unless where they record the observations of
some older person. In both, moreover, it requires to be
noted whether they are writing controversially or historically:
because we all know that through the imperfection
of our nature we are apt to overstate our own case, and to
understate that of our opponents. And if that is the case
now, when a more extended and more accurate education
has disciplined the minds of writers to impartiality, how
much more must it have been so in an earlier stage of
controversial writing, when there had been no opportunity
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
for any such discipline. It is necessary, therefore, in the
perusal of their controversial writings to be on our guard,
and to notice, in any particular case, whether the mind of
the writer is likely to have been influenced in his statements
by any such bias. It must be remembered, moreover, that
no individual author can be considered as evidence for the
state of the universal Church, unless we have sufficient
proof that he had means of knowing the condition of the
whole Church, and unless we can gather that, being so
qualified, he intends to speak thus largely.
</p>

<p>
Again, when not writing controversially, if we are aware
that they laboured under any particular prejudice or bias,
either towards any particular opinion or state of feeling, or
against any particular class or individual, which is liable to
affect their statements,&mdash;then likewise we must view them
with caution.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, when we have no evidence of any
circumstance likely to pervert their perceptions, or to exaggerate
their statements, it is obvious that they must be
taken at their full value.
</p>

<p>
3. We use the Fathers as evidence of the <emph>doctrine</emph> which
was taught by the Church, in their own and preceding ages.
And here some of the remarks just made will apply again.
The Fathers, like all other writers, sometimes state their
own individual opinions, or the views of doctrine which
prevailed in the sect or party to which they were attached,
or in the particular part of the Church in which they were
placed, or in the age in which they lived: at other times,
and more frequently, the doctrines of the whole Church, in
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
their own and all preceding ages. Now, where a writer
states that what he is saying is held by the whole Church,
unless we know any thing to the contrary, it is reasonable
to believe that it was the case; because we know that the
tradition of doctrine was, for the most part, jealously kept
up by the perpetual intercourse and communication between
the bishops of the several churches. And so again, where
a writer affirms that any particular doctrine has been
handed down from the beginning, unless we have opposing
evidence, it is reasonable to take his word; because we
know that it was the custom and practice of the whole
Church to require every new bishop to confess the doctrine
<emph>already received</emph>, and to teach its doctrines to new converts
as already received. And, at all events, such a statement
is conclusive evidence, that such doctrine had come down
from a generation or two preceding that of the writer;
unless (as was said before) we have proof to the contrary.
</p>

<p>
But, as has been already stated, it is possible for an
individual to be led away by controversy, or prejudice, or
party bias; and therefore, when he is manifestly under any
such influence, it is well to be on our guard. For that and
other reasons, in any matter of serious doubt, it is impossible
to rest upon the word of any single writer; but we use
him as a link in the chain of evidence as to the doctrine
taught from the beginning by the united universal Church.
</p>

<p>
4. We use them to aid us in interpreting the text of
Scripture. For many of them quote very largely from the
Sacred Volume; and as some lived near apostolical times,
and many wrote in the language in which the New Testament
was written, whilst others were persons of great
<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>
inquiry and learning, and lived nearer to the localities of the
sacred events than we do,&mdash;they had advantages which we
do not possess. When, therefore, several or many of them
concur in giving one uniform meaning to particular passages
of Scripture, the evidence becomes very strong that they
had the right interpretation: and even where only one
writer gives any assistance upon any particular text, we
shall frequently see reason for accepting his acceptation of
it in preference to more modern suggestions. At the same
time it is necessary to bear in mind, that most of them
knew nothing of the original language of the Old Testament;
and that they are often only <emph>applying</emph> passages
according to the prevalent habit (countenanced indeed by
our Lord and his Apostles, but carried to various degrees
of excess by most of the early writers) of seeking for mystical
accommodations: and we must distinguish between
application and interpretation.
</p>

<p>
Now these methods of employing the writings of the
Fathers are <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à priori</foreign> so obvious and so unobjectionable, that
few writers of any credit object to the principle: but as
the results of the application of the principle are highly
inconvenient to those who have rejected the doctrine or
discipline universally upheld in the primitive ages of the
Church, two lines of argument have been taken to nullify
this application. And as they have been lately revived in
various ways, and particularly by the re-publication of the
work from which most of them have been derived, viz.
Daillé's Treatise <hi rend='italic'>on the Right Use of the Fathers</hi>, I have
thought proper to notice them in that brief manner which
the limits of a preface permit. Some, indeed, of the objections
brought forward ought to be considered as simply
<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>
cautions to the inquirer, and as such I have already treated
them; the chief remaining ones I now proceed to mention.
</p>

<p>
(1.) Some contend that, however reasonable in the abstract
this sort of appeal to the Fathers may appear, it is
beset with such difficulties, that it is useless in practice:
that we have so few early writings, that those we have are
so adulterated, that we have so many forgeries in the names
of early writers, that the writings of the Fathers are so
difficult to understand, that they so often give the opinions
of others without any intimation that they are not their
own, that they so constantly altered their views as they
grew older, and that it so frequently happened that the men
who are now of most note were in a minority of their contemporaries,&mdash;that
it is practically useless to attempt to
apply the Fathers to modern use.
</p>

<p>
Now I do not deny that there is something in these difficulties;
otherwise they would not have been brought forward
at all. No doubt we have but few writings of sub-apostolical
times: but then we must use such as we have,
and illustrate their sense by such methods as are in our
power; and we shall find that they give a clear and consistent
testimony to several important matters, both of
doctrine and of discipline. It might be true, when Daillé
first wrote, that the very important epistles of S. Ignatius
were much adulterated: but it is not so now; the
genuine copies having become known to the world in his
time: neither is it true to any considerable extent of
subsequent writers; and when it is, it simply presents a
difficulty, which must be surmounted as we best can, or
must cast a doubt over any particular writing. Sermons
<pb n='xii'/><anchor id='Pgxii'/>
and popular treatises of writers of note were often altered
in transcribing; just as we, in these days, re-publish popular
books with omissions and alterations suited to the
change of times, or to the shade of difference between our
own views and those of the writer: and for that reason
works of that description, however useful for devotional
reading and instruction, must be brought forward in controversy
with more caution than others, and sometimes set
aside altogether. In short there is need of judgment and
discrimination in the use of the Fathers; and that is the
whole amount of this difficulty. With regard to the difficulty
of understanding them, that is of course a matter of
degree, dependent upon the acquaintance of the student
with the original languages, as used in the age and country
of the writers, upon his acquaintance with Church history
and the state of controversy, upon the degree of prejudice
or false doctrine with which his own mind is imbued: but
I do not think that they present nearly so much difficulty as
the Platonical writers, which many persons study with great
interest. As to the Fathers giving the opinions of others
without intimating that they are so, that is no more than
St. Paul himself does; and it very seldom occurs. So no
doubt, like all other persons, they modify their views and
occasionally change them, as they grow older: but that is,
for the most part, only in subordinate matters, and it is
very rarely that the circumstance presents any practical
difficulty. Finally, that men whose name has become great
amongst posterity were in a minority in their own age, is no
doubt true in some instances: but when it is so, it can be
ascertained, and must be allowed for; and when it cannot
be ascertained it must not be surmised. And even where
they were so, as in the case of Athanasius, they may be
<pb n='xiii'/><anchor id='Pgxiii'/>
connected with a majority in preceding and subsequent
ages.
</p>

<p>
So that these objections are partly such difficulties as
occur in every study, (but stated with much exaggeration,)
and partly flimsy unpractical cavils, not worth dwelling
upon.
</p>

<p>
(2.) But supposing that the writings of the Fathers are
intelligible upon many points, another class of objections
arises. It is asserted that they were themselves often mistaken,
that they even contradict one another, and in short
that no class or party is really willing to abide by their
decision.
</p>

<p>
Here again, if they were mistaken, let it be shown by
undoubted testimony (of Holy Writ or otherwise) that
they were mistaken: but let no one take for granted that
because they differ from the received notions of our own
age, they were therefore in error. It should never be forgotten
that <emph>every age has its errors</emph>: and it may be, possibly,
that wherein we differ from them the error is our own. No
doubt each eminent writer then, as each eminent writer
now, was in some respects mistaken. It is the simple condition
of humanity to be liable to error. But as that does
not cause us to refuse the testimony of our contemporaries,
or their aid in the pursuit of truth, so it need not cause us
to turn a deaf ear to the earlier writers. The circumstance
that in some respects each was in error only renders their
combined testimony to truth more weighty. It has indeed
been asserted that they were all in error upon certain points:
<pb n='xiv'/><anchor id='Pgxiv'/>
but that assertion the Author has elsewhere<note place='foot'>In his <q>Doctrine of Scripture and of the Primitive Church upon
Religious Celibacy,</q> in reply to the author of <q>Antient Christianity.</q></note> shown to be
totally destitute of truth. Again, with regard to their
contradictions of each other, where they do occur they
should of course be noted; but the cases will be found to
be of little practical importance; and their differences upon
some points only place in a clearer light their agreement
where they do agree. Lastly, as to the alleged fact that
no class or party heartily accepts even the combined evidence
of the Fathers, it is certainly true of two opposite
parties; viz. the Roman Church and those Protestants who
have rejected the Apostolical succession,&mdash;both setting up
modern opinions to oppose or to explain away primitive
doctrine: but it is not true of the Church of England,
which (as has been frequently shown) both formally recognizes
the consent of Catholic Doctors, and does in point of
fact, in her public acts and documents, agree substantially
in doctrine and discipline with that consent, so far as it has
yet been ascertained; whatever instances have been brought
forward to the contrary being mistakes in matter of fact.
</p>

<p>
5. But besides this use of the Fathers as <emph>evidence</emph>, many
persons attribute to them a certain degree of <emph>authority</emph>;
and greater objection is felt to appealing to them as authority,
than to using them as testimony. There are, however,
very different ways of treating them as authority.
</p>

<p>
Now to quote sentences of the Fathers, as we do texts of
Holy Writ, as being infallibly conclusive, (which has been
<pb n='xv'/><anchor id='Pgxv'/>
done by writers of the Roman Church, especially before
Daillé's time,) can only be done in ignorance or in bad
faith; because every person acquainted with them knows
that, like all uninspired writers, they differ from each other
and from themselves. But if we simply quote them as persons
whose opinion or testimony ought to have with us very
great weight, either for what they were in themselves, or
for the age in which they lived, this is a quite different matter;
it is constantly done in the Homilies of the Church;
and there surely can be no valid objection to it. We
do not hesitate to appeal to the judgment of the great lights
of our own Church, and to regard their dicta as not to be
lightly questioned, partly for their own learning, judgment,
and piety, (as Hooker, Sanderson, Wilson, Waterland,)
partly for the era in which they flourished, (as Cranmer,
Ridley, Jewel:) we give them authority over our own minds,
and in deciding controversies between ourselves; and what
valid objection can be raised to our giving corresponding
weight to the worthies of more ancient times? And as the
earliest writers conversed either with Apostles, or with
those who had heard the Apostles, it is natural to attribute
greater weight to their words than to those of subsequent
writers. And what if they do show whilst writing, that
they had no anticipation of being guides to posterity? what
if they caution us against trusting them implicitly, and recommend
us to search the Scriptures for ourselves? what if
they were sometimes in error? Do not all these circumstances
apply to those more modern authors whom we do
not hesitate to recognize as, in themselves, authorities? and
why then should we be reluctant to yield to the more ancient
that authority, as individuals, which all subsequent time has
<pb n='xvi'/><anchor id='Pgxvi'/>
accorded to them? Authority may be great without being
infallible. Authority may have weighty influence upon the
judgment without directly binding the conscience.
</p>

<p>
These remarks and arguments are capable of being stated
much more fully, and of being illustrated by instances
throughout; but to do so would require a separate treatise;
and it has been thought better to produce them thus nakedly
than to omit them altogether.
</p>

<p>
It is proper to state that the editions of Irenæus and of
other Fathers referred to are chiefly the Benedictine:
Clement of Alexandria is quoted in the edition of Klotz,
and Eusebius in that of Zimmermann.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='xvii'/><anchor id='Pgxvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Subscribers' Names.</head>

<p>
Her Majesty Adelaide The Queen Dowager.
</p>

<p>
The Most Reverend William Howley, D.D., Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
The Most Reverend Edward Harcourt, D.C.L., Lord Archbishop of York,
Primate of England.
</p>

<p>
The Most Reverend John George Beresford, D.D., Lord Archbishop of
Armagh, Primate of all Ireland.
</p>

<p>
The Right Reverend Edward Maltby, D.D., Lord Bishop of Durham.
</p>

<p>
The Right Reverend John Kaye, D.D., Lord Bishop of Lincoln.
</p>

<p>
The Right Reverend Christopher Bethell, D.D., Lord Bishop of Bangor.
</p>

<p>
The Right Reverend Edward Coplestone, D.D., Lord Bishop of Llandaff.
</p>

<p>
The Right Reverend Richard Bagot, D.D., Lord Bishop of Oxford.
</p>

<p>
The Right Reverend Joseph Allen, D.D., Lord Bishop of Ely.
</p>

<p>
The Right Reverend Charles Thomas Longley, D.D., Lord Bishop of Ripon.
</p>

<p>
The Right Reverend Edward Denison, D.D., Lord Bishop of Salisbury.
</p>

<p>
The Right Reverend James Bowstead, D.D., Lord Bishop of Lichfield.
</p>

<p>
The Right Reverend Connop Thirlwall, D.D., Lord Bishop of St. David's.
</p>

<p>
Acland, Sir T. Dyke, Bart., M.P., Killerton, Devon.
</p>

<p>
Allen, Rev. Henry, Vicar of St. Mary-le-Wigford, Lincoln.
</p>

<p>
Anderson, Rev. J. S. M., Perpetual Curate of St. George's, Brighton.
</p>

<p>
Andrews, Mr., Bookseller, Durham.
</p>

<p>
Andrews, Rev. W., Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Anson, Very Rev. Frederic, D.D., Dean of Chester.
</p>

<p>
Anson, Rev. Frederic, Rector of Sudbury, Derbyshire.
</p>

<p>
Arnold, Rev. T. K., Rector of Lyndon, Rutland.
</p>

<p>
Associates of the late Rev. Dr. Bray, 4 copies.
</p>

<p>
Atkinson, Rev. William, Rector of Gateshead Fell, Durham.
</p>

<pb n='xviii'/><anchor id='Pgxviii'/>

<p>
Austen, Rev. J. T., Vicar of Aldworth, Berkshire.
</p>

<p>
Bagot, G. T., Esq., Exeter College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Bagot, Lady Harriet, Cuddesden Palace, Oxfordshire.
</p>

<p>
Bagot, Rev. Charles, Rector of Islip, Oxfordshire.
</p>

<p>
Bagot, Hon. and Rev. Hervey C., Blithfield, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Bagot, Rev. Lewis F., Rector of Castle Rising, Norfolk.
</p>

<p>
Baker, Rev. R. B., Incumbent of Hilderstone, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Bamford, William, Esq., Rugeley, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Barrow, Rev. John, Tutor of Queen's College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Bellett, Rev. George, Perpetual Curate of Bridgenorth, Salop.
</p>

<p>
Berens, Rev. E., Archdeacon of Berks, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Bickersteth, Rev. E., Rector of Watton, Hertfordshire.
</p>

<p>
Bill, John, jun., Esq., Farley Hall, Staffordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Blackburn, Rev. Peter.
</p>

<p>
Blagg, J. M., Esq., Solicitor, Cheadle, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Bloxam, Rev. J. R., Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Blunt, Rev. J. J., B.D., Lady Margaret's Professor of Divinity in the University
of Cambridge, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Bonney, Ven. H. K., D.D., Archdeacon of Bedford.
</p>

<p>
Bowen, Rev. J., Rector of West Lynn, Norfolk.
</p>

<p>
Bridges, Rev. T. E., D.D., President of Corpus Christi College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Brooks, H., Esq., Brazenose College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Broughton, Rev. B. S., Rector of Washington, Durham, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Broughton, Rev. C. F., Rector of Norbury and Vicar of Uttoxeter, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Brown, Mrs., Uttoxeter, Staffordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Browne, Rev. T. P., Rector of Gratwich and Perpetual Curate of Kingston,
Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Browne, Mrs. Anne.
</p>

<p>
Bruges, W. H. Ludlow, Esq., M.P., Seend, Wiltshire.
</p>

<p>
Buckmaster, Nevill, Esq.
</p>

<p>
Buckston, Mrs., Ashbourne, Derbyshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Budd, Miss, Croscombe, Somerset.
</p>

<p>
Burns, Mr., Publisher, 17, Portman-street, Portman-square, London.
</p>

<p>
Butt, Rev. T., Rector of Kinnersley and Perpetual Curate of Trentham,
Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
C., F.
</p>

<p>
Cambridge, Ven. G. O., Archdeacon of Middlesex, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Cambridge, Mrs.
</p>

<p>
Chaffers, Rev. Thomas, Fellow and Tutor of Brazenose College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Chamberlain, Rev. T. Student of Christ Church, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Chandler, Very Rev. George, D.C.L., F.R.S., Dean of Chichester.
</p>

<p>
Charlewood, Rev. C. B., Oak Hill, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Cheetham Library, Manchester.
</p>

<p>
Christie, A. J., Esq., Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford.
</p>

<pb n='xix'/><anchor id='Pgxix'/>

<p>
Churton, Rev. E., Rector of Crayke, Durham.
</p>

<p>
Clerke, Ven. C. C., Archdeacon of Oxford, and Rector of Milton, Berks.
</p>

<p>
Collinson, Rev. John, Rector of Bolden, Durham.
</p>

<p>
Collinson, Rev. R., Perpetual Curate of Usworth, Durham.
</p>

<p>
Combe and Crossley, Messrs., Booksellers, Leicester, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Copeland, Rev. W. J., Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Corfe, Rev. A. T., Vice Principal of Elizabeth College, Guernsey, and Minister
of Bethel Chapel in that Island.
</p>

<p>
Corfe, Rev. Joseph, Priest Vicar of Exeter Cathedral.
</p>

<p>
Cornish, Rev. C. L., Fellow and Tutor of Exeter College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Cotton, Mrs., Adderbury, Oxfordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Craufurd, Mrs. R., Dawlish, Devonshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Craufurd, Rev. R. G., Curate of Portishead, Gloucestershire.
</p>

<p>
Crawley, Rev. Richard, Vicar of Steeple Ashton, Wiltshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Crouch, Mrs., Narborough, Leicestershire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Crowther, H., Esq.
</p>

<p>
Dalton, Rev. C. B., Fellow of Wadham College, Oxford, and Chaplain of
Lincoln's Inn, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Dansey, Rev. W., M.A., Rector of Donhead St. Andrew, Wilts.
</p>

<p>
Dashwood, Rev. J., Barton-under-Needwood, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Davis, J., Esq., Fisherton-de-la-Mere House, Wilts, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Davies, Rev. W. L., Principal of Elizabeth College, Guernsey.
</p>

<p>
Dean, Rev. Thomas, Perpetual Curate of Little Malvern, Warwickshire, and
Master of Colwall Grammar School.
</p>

<p>
Disney, General Sir Moore, Manor House, East Acton.
</p>

<p>
Dodsworth, Rev. W., Incumbent of Christ Church, Regent's Park, London.
</p>

<p>
Douglas, Rev. H., Rector of Whickham, Durham.
</p>

<p>
Eccles, John, Esq., M.D., Birmingham.
</p>

<p>
Elrington, Rev. C. R., D.D., Regius Professor of Divinity in the University
of Dublin.
</p>

<p>
Faber, Rev. G. S., B.D., Master of Sherborn Hospital, Durham, and Prebendary
of Salisbury.
</p>

<p>
Ferard, Joseph, Esq., Temple, London.
</p>

<p>
Fisher, Joseph, Esq., Englefield, Berkshire.
</p>

<p>
Forester, J., Esq., Winfield, Berkshire.
</p>

<p>
Fortescue, &mdash;&mdash;, Esq.
</p>

<p>
Fox, William, Esq., Woodseat, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Fox, Mrs., Woodseat.
</p>

<p>
Fox, Mrs. Sarah.
</p>

<p>
Frere, P., Esq., Fellow and Tutor of Downing College, Cambridge.
</p>

<p>
Frith, &mdash;&mdash;, Esq.
</p>

<p>
Frowd, John Speed, Esq., M.D., Croscombe, Somersetshire.
</p>

<p>
Fulford, Rev. Francis, Rector of Trowbridge, Wiltshire.
</p>

<pb n='xx'/><anchor id='Pgxx'/>

<p>
Garbett, Rev. John, Rector of St. George's, Birmingham.
</p>

<p>
Gepp, Rev. George Edward, Head-Master of the Grammar School, Ashbourne,
Derbyshire.
</p>

<p>
Gibbons, Rev. John, Rector of Brasted, Kent.
</p>

<p>
Goode, Rev. Alexander, Vicar of Caverswall, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Goodenough, Joseph, Esq., Nether Cerne, Dorset, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Goodenough, Rev. W. S., Rector of Yate, Gloucestershire, 4 copies.
</p>

<p>
Granville, Rev. Court, Vicar of Mayfield, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Grayson, Rev. Anthony, D.D., Principal of St. Edmund's Hall, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Greenhill, W. A., Esq., M.D., Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Gresley, Rev. William, Prebendary of Lichfield and Lecturer of St. Mary's.
</p>

<p>
Hale, Ven. W. H., Archdeacon of Middlesex, and Canon Residentiary of
St. Paul's.
</p>

<p>
Hannaford, Mr., Bookseller, Exeter, 4 copies.
</p>

<p>
Hart, Thomas, Esq., Uttoxeter, Staffordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Hart, Mrs., Uttoxeter, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Hart, Miss, Uttoxeter, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Hassells, Rev. Charles S., Foxearth, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Haweis, Rev. J. O. W., Sydenham Grove, Norwood.
</p>

<p>
Haynes, Rev. Robert, Curate of Kingsley, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Hayter, W. G., Esq., M.P., 11, Hyde Park Terrace, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Hendrickson, Rev. William, Perpetual Curate of Oakamoor, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Hessey, Rev. J. A., Fellow of St. John's College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Higton, Rev. W., Perpetual Curate of Croxden, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Hill, Rev. Charles, Rector of Bromesberrow, Gloucestershire.
</p>

<p>
Hill, Rev. John, Vice-Principal of St. Edmund's Hall, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
H., Miss.
</p>

<p>
Hoare, Ven. C. James, Archdeacon and Prebendary of Winton, and Vicar
of Godstone, Surrey.
</p>

<p>
Hoare, G. M., Esq., The Lodge, Morden, Surrey.
</p>

<p>
Hoare, Charles H., Esq., Morden Lodge.
</p>

<p>
Hoare, Henry James, Esq., Morden Lodge.
</p>

<p>
Hoare, Rev. Richard Peter, Rector of Stourton, Wilts.
</p>

<p>
Hoare, Mrs. Peter, Kilsey Park, Kent.
</p>

<p>
Hoare, Miss.
</p>

<p>
Hodson, Ven. George, Archdeacon of Stafford, and Vicar of Colwich.
</p>

<p>
Hoon, Mr., Bookseller, Ashbourne.
</p>

<p>
Hornby, Rev. R., Minister of Walton-le-Dale, Lancashire.
</p>

<p>
Howell, Rev. Hinds, Curate of Shobrooke, Devon.
</p>

<p>
Howman, Rev. E. J., Rector of Hookering and Bexwell, Norfolk.
</p>

<p>
Hutchinson, Rev. W., Rector of Checkley, Staffordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Jacobson, Rev. William, Vice-Principal of Magdalen Hall, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
James, Rev. Thomas, Vicar of Sibbertoft, Northamptonshire.
</p>

<p>
Jelf, George, Esq., Manor House, East Acton.
</p>

<pb n='xxi'/><anchor id='Pgxxi'/>

<p>
Jelf, Mrs.
</p>

<p>
Jenkins, Rev. H., Professor of Greek in the University of Durham.
</p>

<p>
Johnson, Rev. Wilbraham W., Collegiate Church, Manchester.
</p>

<p>
Kempe, Rev. A. A., Curate of Dilhorne, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Kennaway, Rev. C., Incumbent of Christ Church, Cheltenham.
</p>

<p>
Kennedy, Rev. Rann, Perpetual Curate of St. Paul's, Birmingham.
</p>

<p>
Kenrick, G. C., Esq., Surgeon, Melksham, Wilts.
</p>

<p>
King, Rev. Charles, Close, Salisbury.
</p>

<p>
King, Hon. Mr. Locke, Woburn.
</p>

<p>
Kinsey, Rev. W. M., B.D., Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, and Assistant
Minister of St. John's Church, Cheltenham, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Kynnersley, Thomas Sneyd, Esq., Loxley Park, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Kynnersley, Mrs. C. Sneyd, Highfields, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Kynnersley, Thomas C. Sneyd, Highwood, Staffordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Kynnersley, Rev. E. C. Sneyd, Rector of Draycott, Staffordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Langham, Dowager Lady, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Law, Hon. and Rev. W. T., Chancellor of Wells Cathedral, Rector of East
Brent, Somerset.
</p>

<p>
Lawton, Rev. E., Curate of Elmswell, Suffolk.
</p>

<p>
Le Hunt, Peter Bainbrigge, Esq., Ashbourne.
</p>

<p>
Lendon, Rev. Charles, Curate of Kensington.
</p>

<p>
Levett, Rev. Walter, Vicar of Bray, Berkshire.
</p>

<p>
Lloyd, Thomas, Esq., Bronwydd, Cardiganshire.
</p>

<p>
Lloyd, James, Esq., Bronwydd.
</p>

<p>
Lloyd, T. D., Esq., Bronwydd.
</p>

<p>
Lonsdale, Rev. J., B.D., Principal of King's College, London.
</p>

<p>
Lowe, Very Rev. J. H., D.D., Dean of Exeter.
</p>

<p>
Ludlow, Rev. Edward, Vicar of Winterbourne St. Martin, Dorsetshire.
</p>

<p>
M'All, Rev. Edw., Rector of Brixton, Isle of Wight.
</p>

<p>
M'Ewen, Rev. A., Curate of Semington, Wiltshire.
</p>

<p>
Mackenzie, L. M., Esq., Exeter College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Madan, Rev. Spencer, Canon Residentiary of Lichfield, and Vicar of Batheaston
and Twiverton, Somersetshire.
</p>

<p>
Mair, Rev. Henry, Donhead Lodge, Wilts.
</p>

<p>
Marriott, Rev. C., Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, and Principal of the
Diocesan College, Chichester.
</p>

<p>
Marshall, Rev. A., M.A., Curate of Charlton, Wilts.
</p>

<p>
Merewether, Rev. Francis, Rector of Coleorton, Leicestershire.
</p>

<p>
Molesworth, Rev. J. E. N., D.D., Vicar of Rochdale.
</p>

<p>
Monkhouse, Mrs. Adderbury, Oxfordshire.
</p>

<p>
Moore, Rev. Henry, Vicar of Eccleshall, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Morice, Rev. H., Rural Dean and Vicar of Ashwell, Herts.
</p>

<p>
Moseley, Rev. Thomas, Rector of St. Martin's, Birmingham.
</p>

<pb n='xxii'/><anchor id='Pgxxii'/>

<p>
Newman, Rev. J. H., B.D., Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, and Vicar of
St. Mary's.
</p>

<p>
Noel, Rev. B., Walthamstowe, Essex.
</p>

<p>
Norris, A., &amp; Son, Booksellers, Uttoxeter, Staffordshire, 4 copies.
</p>

<p>
Norris, Rev. H. H., Rector of South Hackney, and Prebendary of St. Paul's,
London.
</p>

<p>
Nunns, Rev. Thomas, Perpetual Curate of St. Bartholomew's, Birmingham.
</p>

<p>
Ogilvie, Rev. C. A., Rector of Ross, Herefordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Paget, Rev. F. E., Rector of Elford, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Parsons, John, Esq., Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Philips, Robert, Esq., Heybridge, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Philips, Mrs. R., Heybridge.
</p>

<p>
Pinder, Rev. John H., Professor of Theology in the Wells Diocesan College.
</p>

<p>
Pinfold, Rev. C. J., Rector of Bromshall, Staffordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Porcher, Charles, Esq., Cliff House, Dorsetshire.
</p>

<p>
Preston Clerical Book Society.
</p>

<p>
Prevost, Rev. Sir George, Perpetual Curate of Stinchcombe, Gloucestershire.
</p>

<p>
Prichard, Rev. J. C., Fellow and Tutor of Oriel College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Pulleine, Rev. Robert, Curate of Spennithorne, Yorkshire.
</p>

<p>
Pusey, Rev. E. B., D.D., Canon of Christ Church, Oxford, and Regius Professor
of Hebrew.
</p>

<p>
Radcliffe, Rev. G., Rector of St. Edmund's, Salisbury.
</p>

<p>
Rawle, Rev. Richard, Rector of Cheadle, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Ray, Rev. Henry, Curate of Hunston, Suffolk.
</p>

<p>
Redstone, Mr., Bookseller, Guernsey.
</p>

<p>
Reed, Rev. John, Vicar of Newburn, Northumberland, and Lecturer of St.
Nicholas, Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
</p>

<p>
Rham, Rev. W. H., Vicar of Winkfield, Berkshire.
</p>

<p>
Richards, Rev. J. L., D.D., Rector of Exeter College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Rickards, Rev. Samuel, Rector of Stowlangtoft, Suffolk.
</p>

<p>
Riggs, Rev. George, Fellow and Tutor of Queen's College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Risley, Rev. W. Cotton, Vicar of Deddington, Oxfordshire.
</p>

<p>
Robinson, Frederick, Esq., 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Rowden, Rev. E., Vicar of Highworth, Wiltshire.
</p>

<p>
Royds, Rev. C. S., Rector of Haughton, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Russell, Jesse Watts, Esq., Ilam Hall, Staffordshire, 10 copies.
</p>

<p>
St. Edmund Hall, Library of, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Sandars, Joseph, Esq., Johnson Hall, Shropshire.
</p>

<p>
Seagrave, Mrs., Bromshall Rectory.
</p>

<p>
Sewell, Rev. William, Fellow and Tutor of Exeter College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Shaw, Rev. E. B., Rector of Narborough, Leicestershire.
</p>

<p>
Sheppard, Sir Thomas Cotton, Bart., Crakemarsh Hall, Staffordshire, 2
copies.
</p>

<pb n='xxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxiii'/>

<p>
Smyth, Rev. C., Vicar of Houghton, Northamptonshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Smythe, Rev. P. M., Curate of Tamworth, Warwickshire.
</p>

<p>
Sneyd, Rev. Henry, Perpetual Curate of Wetley Rocks, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Soames, Rev. Henry, Rector of Stapleford Tawney, Essex.
</p>

<p>
Spreat, Mr., Bookseller, Exeter.
</p>

<p>
Stevenson, Mr., Bookseller, Cambridge.
</p>

<p>
Talbot, Rev. G., Vicar of Evercreech, Somerset.
</p>

<p>
Taylor, Herbert, Esq., M.D., Uttoxeter, Staffordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Thynne, Rev. Lord Charles, Vicar of Longbridge Deverill, Wiltshire.
</p>

<p>
Todd, Rev. James H., D.D., Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, and Treasurer
of Patrick's Cathedral.
</p>

<p>
Tonyn, Rev. J. F., Rector of Alvechurch, Worcestershire.
</p>

<p>
Townsend, Rev. George, Prebendary of Durham.
</p>

<p>
Townsend, Rev. G. F., Curate of St. Margaret's, Durham.
</p>

<p>
Trevelyan, Rev. J. T., Vicar of Milverton, Somersetshire.
</p>

<p>
Tripp, H., Esq., Scholar of Worcester College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Tritton, Rev. Robert, Rector of Morden, Surrey.
</p>

<p>
Tritton, Miss, Morden.
</p>

<p>
Trollope, Rev. Arthur, Curate of St. Mary-le-Bow, London.
</p>

<p>
Vaux, Rev. Bowyer, Hethersett, Norfolk.
</p>

<p>
Vaux, Rev. W. B.D., Prebendary of Winchester.
</p>

<p>
Vernon, Hon. Mrs. H. V., Mayfield, Staffordshire.
</p>

<p>
Vickers, Ven. W., Archdeacon of Salop, and Rector of Chetton, Salop.
</p>

<p>
Vincent, Rev. O. P., Curate of Devizes, Wilts.
</p>

<p>
Waite, Rev. Thomas, D.D., Rector of Great Chart, Kent, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Ward, Rev. W. H. P., Rector of Compton Vallence, Dorsetshire.
</p>

<p>
Walker, Rev. R., Wadham College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Walters, Mr., Bookseller, Rugeley, 4 copies.
</p>

<p>
Wells, Rev. E. Cornish, Perpetual Curate of Ixworth, Suffolk.
</p>

<p>
Whieldon, Rev. E., Rector of Burslem, and Perpetual Curate of Bradley,
Staffordshire, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Wickens, Rev. Henry, 35, Mortimer-street, Cavendish-square, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Wickens, J. Esq., 35, Mortimer-street, Cavendish-square, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Wickens, John, Esq., 7, New-square, Lincoln's Inn, 2 copies.
</p>

<p>
Wilberforce, Ven. Samuel, Archdeacon of Surrey, Canon of Winchester,
and Chaplain to H. R. H. Prince Albert.
</p>

<p>
Williams, Robert, Esq., M.P., Bridehead House, Dorsetshire.
</p>

<p>
Wilson, Rev. J. P., Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford.
</p>

<p>
Wilson, Rev. W., Curate of St. Chad's, Rochdale.
</p>

<p>
Wolley, Rev. T. L., Rector of Portishead, and Prebendary of Wells.
</p>

<p>
Woodhouse, Rev. G. W., Vicar of Albrighton, Salop.
</p>

<p>
Wright, Rev. T. P., Hackney, 2 copies.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter I. Life of S. Ireaeus, and General Account Of His
Writings.'/>
<head>Chapter I. Life of S. Irenæus, and General Account Of His
Writings.</head>

<p>
If Polycarp is an object of great interest, as the disciple
of St. John, and the hearer both of him and of
other contemporaries of our Lord; if Justin is so, as
having been the first man of eminent learning who
came over from the walks of heathen philosophy to
submit his mind to the doctrine of Christ; Irenæus,
again, has claims upon our attention scarcely less, as
having been brought up in the Christian faith under
the eye of Polycarp; having, therefore, no previous
tinge of Judaism or heathen philosophy, but imbued
with Christian principles almost, if not quite, from
his cradle, and at the same time displaying equal
vigour of mind, if not equal knowledge of heathen
learning, with either Justin or Clement of Alexandria<note place='foot'>Tertullian (<hi rend='italic'>adv. Valent.</hi> 5.) calls him <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>omnium doctrinarum
curiosissimus explorator</foreign>.</note>.
To these circumstances we are no doubt
to attribute it, that there appear in his writings a
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
greater justness of reasoning, and a more unexceptionable
use of scripture, than is to be found in the
writers of the Alexandrian school.
</p>

<p>
With regard to the time of his birth we know
nothing certain. We find him <emph>still a lad</emph>, παῖς ὢν ἔτι<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist. ad Florinum.</hi> Εῖδον γάρ σε, παῖς ὢν ἔτι ἐν τῇ κάτω
Ἀσίᾳ παρὰ τῷ Πολυκάρπῳ, λαμπρῶς πράττοντα ἐν τῇ βασιλικῇ αὐλῇ,
καὶ πειρώμενον εὐδοκιμεῖν παρ᾽ αὐτῷ. Μᾶλλον γὰρ τὰ τότε διαμνημονεύω
τῶν ἔναγχος γινομένων· αἱ γὰρ ἐκ παίδων μαθήσεις, συναύξουσαι
τῇ ψυχῇ, ἐνοῦνται αὑτῇ· ὥστε με δύνασθαι εἰπεῖν καὶ τὸν
τόπον, ἐν ᾦ καθεζόμενος διελέγετο ὁ μακάριος Πολύκαρπος, καὶ
τὰς προόδους αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰς εἰσόδους, καὶ τὸν χαρακτῆρα τοῦ βίου,
καὶ τὴν τοῦ σώματος ἰδέαν, καὶ τὰς διαλέξεις ἃς ἐποιεῖτο πρὸς τὸ
πλῆθος, καὶ τὴν μετὰ Ἰωάννου συναναστροφὴν ὡς ἀπήγγελλε, καὶ
τὴν μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν τῶν ἑωρακότων τὸν Κύριον· καὶ ὡς ἀπεμνημόνευε
τοὺς λόγους αὐτῶν, καὶ περὶ τοῦ Κυρίου τίνα ἧν ἂ παρ᾽
ἐκείνων ἠκηκόει· καὶ περὶ τῶν δυνάμεων αὐτοῦ καὶ περὶ τῆς διδασκαλίας,
ὡς παρὰ τῶν αὐτοπτῶν τῆς ζώης τοῦ Λόγου παρειληφὼς ὁ
Πολύκαρπος ἀπήγγελλε, πάντα σύμφωνα ταῖς γραφαῖς. Ταῦτα καὶ
τότε διὰ τὸ ἕλεος τοῦ Θεοῦ τὸ ἐπ᾽ ἐμοὶ γεγονὸς σπουδαίως ἤκουον,
ὑπομνηματιζόμενος αὐτὰ οὐκ ἐν χάρτῃ, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῇ ἐμῇ καρδίᾳ· καὶ
ἀεὶ διὰ τὴν χάριν τοῦ Θεοῦ γνήσιως αὐτὰ ἀναμαρυκῶμαι.</note>,
listening to the Christian instruction of Polycarp, not
long, as it would appear, before the death of that
martyr. For, after saying<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv. Hær.</hi> III. iii. 4. Καὶ Πολύκαρπος δὲ οὐ μόνον ὑπὸ ἀποστόλων
μαθητευθεὶς, καὶ δυναναστραφεὶς πολλοῖς τοῖς τὸν Χριστὸν
ἑωρακόσιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὑπὸ ἀποστόλων κατασταθεὶς εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν,
ἐν τῇ ἐν Σμύρνῃ ἐκκλησίᾳ, ἐπίσκοπος, ὃν καὶ ἡμεῖς ἑωράκαμεν ἐν
τῇ πρώτῃ ἡμῶν ἡλικίᾳ· (ἐπιπολὺ γὰρ παρέμεινε, καὶ πάνυ γηραλέος,
ἐνδόξως καὶ ἐπιφανέστατα μαρτυρήσας, ἐξῆλθε τοῦ βίου)·
κ. τ. λ.</note> that he had seen Polycarp
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
<emph>in the early part of his life</emph>, ἐν τῇ πρώτῃ ἡλικίᾳ,&mdash;in
order to account for what might appear improbable,
viz., his being the contemporary of that martyr at
all,&mdash;he says, that Polycarp lived to a very advanced
age; ἐπιπολὺ γὰρ παρέμεινε, καὶ πάνυ γεραλέος ...
ἐξῆλθε τοῦ βίου. This makes it evident that it must
have taken place towards the very close of Polycarp's
life; and yet not so near to it but that he had had
time to mark<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep. ad Flor.</hi></note> <emph>his manner of life, and the discourses
he made to the people</emph>, and remembered <emph>his account of
his familiar intercourse with the apostle John, and the
survivors of those who had seen the Lord, and his rehearsals
of their sayings, and of their accounts of the
discourses and miracles of the Lord</emph>. All this would
require, one should suppose, at least five or six years.
Then, again, we are to bear in mind that he would
not have been capable of marking things of such a
nature, (so as to remember them, as he tells us he
did, perfectly,) when a young child, nor until his
mind had in some degree begun to expand. So that
we can scarcely suppose him younger than sixteen at
the time of Polycarp's martyrdom, and the expression
παῖς would admit of his being some years older.
</p>

<p>
Dodwell<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Diss. in Irenæum</hi>, III. § 10, 11.</note>, indeed, has endeavoured to arrive at
greater accuracy, and thinks that, by another casual
expression of Irenæus, in his <hi rend='italic'>letter to Florinus</hi>, he is
enabled to fix the date absolutely. Irenæus remarks
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
that he had seen Florinus, when himself still a lad,
in the company of Polycarp, in Lower Asia; when at
the same time Florinus was <emph>getting on very prosperously
at the court of the emperor</emph>: λαμπρῶς πράττοντα
ἐν τῇ βασιλικῇ αὐλῇ. Taking it for granted
that Irenæus intends to say that he was an actual
witness of the prosperity of his friend, and consequently
that the imperial court must have been at
that very time sojourning in Lower Asia, and having
ascertained that Adrian is the only emperor who
appears to have remained any time there, he fixes
upon the year 122 as the probable year in which
Adrian might have been there, and thus imagines
that he has established at least one date with certainty.
Now the stress of the observation of Irenæus
does not lie upon the success of Florinus at court,
but upon his having associated with Polycarp, and
having endeavoured to gain his good opinion; that,
so far as appears, is the only thing which Irenæus
<emph>witnessed</emph>. The imperial court may therefore have
been at some other place, and Florinus may have
been only on a visit at Smyrna, at the time when
Irenæus saw him there.
</p>

<p>
There is another objection to this hypothesis of
Dodwell, and that is, that it is inconsistent with the
date of the martyrdom of Polycarp, which took place
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 166-7. We have seen above that Irenæus could
not have known him for many years before his death,
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
whereas Dodwell's notion would require him to have
been acquainted with him forty years before, when it
is impossible Polycarp could have been <emph>very old</emph>, to
say nothing of Irenæus' implication as to its having
been towards the close of his life. If we suppose,
then, that he was acquainted with him for six or
eight years, and that he was about eighteen at the
time of his martyrdom, it will make the birth of
Irenæus to have taken place about the year 150.
This, at all events, is the latest date we can assign to
it. Dupin<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Auteurs Ecclésiastiques</hi>, tom. i. S. Irenée.</note> and Massuet<note place='foot'>The Benedictine Editor: <hi rend='italic'>Dissert. Præv.</hi> II. § 2.</note> place it <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 140; Tillemont<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Mémoires</hi>, tom. iii. S. Irenée, art. ii.</note>
twenty years earlier; and Dodwell is desirous
of carrying it up ten or twenty years earlier still.
Perhaps Massuet's date may be nearest the truth.
But exactness in these particulars is of the less moment,
as we have, established by his own mouth, the
main circumstance on account of which it is of importance
to ascertain it: for the chief, if not the
only, reason for desiring to fix the date of his birth
is, that we may judge what kind of witness he is
likely to have been of apostolical tradition. Now we
have seen him expressly affirming that he had heard
Polycarp recount the narratives and doctrines of St.
John and other contemporaries of Christ; and he
likewise informs us he paid diligent attention to him,
and that he remembered him so minutely that he
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
could<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep. ad Flor.</hi> supra.</note> point out the place where he sat, and trace
the walks he was accustomed to take; and moreover,
that he not only heard his words, but treasured them
up in his memory, and was continually refreshing his
remembrance of them by meditation upon them.
The testimony of such a witness must be more than
ordinarily valuable.
</p>

<p>
Upon the death of Polycarp, it is probable that he
put himself under the guidance of Papias, as he is
called by Jerome<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> 53. al. 29. <hi rend='italic'>ad Theodoram viduam</hi>. Refert Irenæus,
vir Apostolicorum temporum, et Papiæ, auditoris Evangelistæ
Joannis, discipulus, Episcopus Ecclesiæ Lugdunensis, quod
Marcus quidam, de Basilidis Gnostici stirpe descendens, primum
ad Gallias venerit, et eas partes, per quas Rhodanus et Garumna
fluunt, suâ doctrinâ maculaverit, maximeque nobiles fœminas,
quædam in occulto mysteria repromittens, hoc errore seduxerit,
magicis artibus et secretâ corporum voluptate amorem sui concilians:
inde Pyrenæum transiens, Hispanias occuparit; et hoc
studii habuerit, ut divitum domos, et in ipsis fœminas maxime
appeteret, quæ ducuntur variis desideriis, semper discentes, et
nunquam ad scientiam veritatis pervenientes. Hoc ille scripsit ante
annos circiter trecentos; et scripsit in iis libris, quos adversus
omnes hæreses doctissimo et eloquentissimo sermone composuit.</note> his <emph>disciple</emph>. Certain it is, that
he several times quotes that pious but too credulous
writer, and that with evident approbation. There
is likewise a person, whom he does not name, but
whom he often mentions<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv. Hær.</hi> I. Præf. 2. xv. 6. III. xvii. 4. xxiii. 3.
IV. xxvii. 1.</note>, from whom he appears to
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
have learnt much, and who was a contemporary of
the apostolical generation. Some have conjectured
him to have been the same as Papias<note place='foot'>See Massuet, <hi rend='italic'>Diss. Præv.</hi> II. § 3.</note>. Dodwell
thinks him to have been Pothinus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Diss. in Iren.</hi> IV. 3.</note>, the predecessor
of Irenæus in the see of Lyons; yet, if he had been
either one or the other of them, there appears no
reason why he should not have named him; for he
does mention Papias by name more than once, and
Pothinus was likewise a person of sufficient eminence
to have been quoted by name. The probability appears
to be, that he was a person of no great note,
but who had the advantage of being a hearer of those
who had seen the Lord<note place='foot'>Irenæus (IV. xxvii. 1.) calls him <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quendam presbyterum qui
audierat ab his qui apostolos viderant, et ab his qui didicerant</foreign>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
How long Irenæus continued to reside in Asia
Minor we know not; but we find him next at Lyons<note place='foot'><p>Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. iii. 2. Καὶ δὴ διαφωνίας ὑπαρχούσης περὶ
τῶν δεδηλωμένων [sc. Montanus and his disciples] αὖθις οἱ κατὰ
τὴν Γαλλίαν ἀδελφοὶ τὴν ἰδίαν κρίσιν καὶ περὶ τούτων εὐλαβῆ καὶ
ὀρθοδοξοτάτην ὑποτάττουσιν· ἐκθέμενοι καὶ τῶν παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς τελειωθέντων
μαρτύρων διαφόρους ἐπιστολὰς, ἃς ἐν δεσμοῖς ἔτι ὑπάρχοντες
τοῖς ἐπ᾽ Ἀσίας καὶ Φρυγίας ἀδελφοῖς διεχάραξαν· οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ
Ἐλευθέρῳ τῷ τότε Ῥωμαίων ἐπισκόπῳ, τῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν εἰρήνης
ἕνεκα πρεσβεύοντες.
</p>
<p>
iv. 1. Οἱ δ᾽ αὐτοὶ μάρτυρες καὶ τὸν Εἰρηναῖον, πρεσβύτερον τότ᾽
ὅντα τῆς ἐν Λουγδούνῳ παροικίας, τῷ δηλωθέντι κατὰ Ῥώμην
ἐπισκόπῳ συνίστων, πλεῖστα τῷ ἀνδρὶ μαρτυροῦντες, ὡς αἱ τοῦτον
ἔχουσαι τὸν τρόπον δηλοῦσι φωναί.</p></note>,
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
a priest of the church there, under Pothinus<note place='foot'><p>Jerome, <hi rend='italic'>Catalog.</hi> Irenæus Pothini Episcopi, qui Lugdunensem
in Gallia regebat ecclesiam, Presbyter, à Martyribus ejusdem
loci ob quasdam Ecclesiæ quæstiones legatus Romam missus,
honorificas super nomine suo ad Eleutherium Episcopum perfert
literas. Postea jam Pothino prope nonagenario ob Christum
martyrio coronato, in locum ejus substituitur. Constat autem
Polycarpi, cujus supra fecimus mentionem, sacerdotis et martyris,
hunc fuisse discipulum. Scripsit quinque <hi rend='italic'>adversus Hæreses</hi> libros,
et <hi rend='italic'>contra Gentes</hi> volumen breve, et <hi rend='italic'>de Disciplina</hi> aliud, et ad
Marcianum fratrem <hi rend='italic'>de Apostolica prædicatione</hi>, et librum <hi rend='italic'>Variorum
tractatuum</hi>, et ad Blastum <hi rend='italic'>de Schismate</hi>, et ad Florinum <hi rend='italic'>de
Monarchia</hi>, sive, quod Deus non sit conditor malorum, et <hi rend='italic'>de
Octava</hi> egregium commentarium, in cujus fine significans se
Apostolicorum temporum vicinum fuisse, sic subscripsit:
</p>
<p>
<q>Adjuro te qui transcribis librum istum, per Dominum Jesum
Christum, et per gloriosum ejus adventum, quo judicaturus est
vivos et mortuos, ut conferas postquam transcripseris, et emendes
illum ad exemplar, unde scripsisti, diligentissime: hanc quoque
obtestationem similiter transferas, ut invenisti in exemplari.</q> Feruntur
ejus et aliæ ad Victorem Episcopum Romæ <hi rend='italic'>de quæstione
Paschæ</hi> epistolæ, in quibus commonet eum, non facile debere
unitatem collegii scindere: siquidem Victor multos Asiæ et Orientis
Episcopos, qui decimaquarta luna cum Judæis pascha celebrabant,
damnandos crediderat; in qua sententia hi qui discrepabant
ab illis, Victori non dederunt manus. Floruit maxime sub
Commodo principe, qui Marco Antonino Vero in imperium successerat.</p></note>, its
venerable bishop. What led him there we are not
informed. The place lay a good way up the Rhone,
near the mouth of which was Marseilles, a Greek
colony from Phocæa in Asia Minor<note place='foot'>Athen. <hi rend='italic'>Deipnosoph.</hi> xiii. 5. Justin, xliii. 3.</note>, with which
commercial intercourse had been kept up ever since
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 600. Business or relationship might have taken
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
him thither, or even to Lyons itself. For although
this latter was a Roman colony, and its name, Lugdunum,
sufficiently evinces that it was not of Greek
foundation, yet the number of Greek names<note place='foot'>Pothinus, the bishop, Attalus, (Περγαμηνὸς τῷ γένει· Euseb.
V. i. 7.) Alcibiades, Biblias, Alexander, (Φρὺξ τὸ γένος· ibid. 21.)
all mentioned by Eusebius, besides others recorded in the martyrologies.</note> amongst
the Christians there shows that there must have been
many of that race residing there. Indeed, the circumstance
that the Montanist heresy, which arose in
Phrygia, spread in no long time to Lyons, and that
the Lyonnese wrote to the churches in Asia and
Phrygia, both to give an account of the persecution,
and to discountenance the opinions of Montanus,
clearly prove that there was some reason for frequent
intercourse and sympathy between Lyons and Asia
Minor.
</p>

<p>
There is no reason, therefore, to conjecture any
extraordinary mission or other conjuncture to bring
him into that part of the world. He may have been
ordained priest after he arrived there; but we cannot
argue that with any certainty from his being called
by Jerome<note place='foot'>See note 7, p. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>.</note> <emph>a priest of Pothinus</emph>; for even when church
discipline attained its greatest strictness, and every
bishop regarded an ecclesiastic ordained by himself
as his subject, there was nothing to prevent a bishop
from transferring one of his clergy to the jurisdiction
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
of another bishop, whose subject he thenceforward
became. So that the epithet made use of by Jerome
only proves&mdash;what we know from Eusebius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. v. 3. Ποθεινοῦ δὴ ἐφ᾽ ὅλοις τῆς ζωῆς ἔτεσιν ἐνενήκοντα
σὺν τοῖς ἐπὶ Γαλλίας μαρτυρήσασι τελειωθέντος, Εἰρηναῖος
τῆς κατὰ Λούγδουνον, ἧς ὁ Ποθεινὸς ἡγεῖτο παροικίας, τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν
διαδέχεται. Πολυκάρπου δὲ τοῦτον ἀκουστὴν γενέσθαι κατὰ
τὴν νέαν ἐμανθάνομεν ἡλικίαν.</note>&mdash;that
Irenæus was a priest of the diocese of Lyons when
Pothinus was bishop.
</p>

<p>
It is the more necessary to remark this, as there
appears to be a disposition gaining ground to take
the slightest evidence as absolute proof. Undoubtedly
a sceptical disposition is a great mischief; but a
credulous temper, although less injurious to the
possessor, is no slight evil, from its natural tendency
to produce scepticism by an unavoidable reaction.
</p>

<p>
But wheresoever Irenæus first entered into the
priesthood, he had abode so long at Lyons in the
year 177<note place='foot'>Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires</hi>, Note 1. Sur les Martyrs de Lion.</note>, that he had gained the character of a person
<emph>zealous for the gospel of Christ</emph><note place='foot'>See the Epistle of the Martyrs to Eleutherus; Euseb.
V. iv. 1. Χαίρειν ἐν Θεῷ σε ἐν πᾶσιν εὐχόμεθα καὶ ἀεὶ, πάτερ
Ἐλεύθερε. Ταῦτά σοι τὰ γράμματα προτρεψάμεθα τόν ἀδελφὸν
ἡμῶν καὶ κοινωνὸν Εἰρηναῖον διακόμισαι· καὶ παρακαλοῦμεν ἔχειν
σε αὐτὸν ἐν παραθέσει, ζηλωτὴν ὄντα τῆς διαθήκης τοῦ Χριστοῦ.
2. Εἰ γὰρ ᾕδειμεν τόπον τινὶ δικαιοσύνην περιποιεῖσθαι, ὡς
πρεσβύτερον ἐκκλησίας, ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ, ἐν πρώτοις ἃν
παρεθέμεθα.</note>, and recommended
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
more by his intrinsic excellence than by his sacred
office; and was so relied upon as to be chosen by the
martyrs of Lyons, then in prison, as a fit person to
send to Eleutherus, bishop of Rome, with their testimony
against the Montanists. It is, indeed, barely
said by Eusebius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. iii. 2. See note 6, p. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>.</note>, that their epistles were written for
the purpose of promoting the peace of the churches
(τῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν εἰρήνης ἕνεκα πρεσβεύοντες); but
connecting them, as he does in his narrative, with
the mention of the Montanist heresy, and of the
dissensions occasioned by it (διαφωνίας ὑπαρχούσης περὶ
τῶν δεδηλωμένων), it is unavoidable to conclude that
they had reference to it. Some light may be thrown
upon the subject by the assertion of Tertullian<note place='foot'>Tertull. <hi rend='italic'>adv. Praxean</hi>, i. Nam iste primus ex Asia hoc
genus perversitatis intulit Romæ.... Nam idem tunc Episcopum
Romanum, agnoscentem jam prophetias Montani, Priscæ,
Maximillæ, et ex ea agnitione pacem ecclesiis Asiæ et Phrygiæ
inferentem, falsa de ipsis prophetis et ecclesiis eorum adseverando,
et præcessorum ejus auctoritates defendendo, coëgit et literas pacis
revocare jam emissas, et a proposito recipiendorum charismatum
concessare. Ita duo negotia diabolo Praxeas Romæ procuravit:
prophetiam expulit (we must remember that Tertullian was a
Montanist), et hæresin intulit: Paracletum fugavit, et Patrem crucifixit.
Fructicaverant avenæ Praxeanæ, hic quoque superseminatæ,
dormientibus multis in simplicitate doctrinæ; traductæ
dehinc per quem Deus voluit, etiam evulsæ videbantur. Denique
caverat pristinum doctor de emendatione sua; et manet chirographum
apud Psychicos (the orthodox), apud quos res tunc gesta
est. Exinde silentium.... Ita aliquamdiu per hypocrisin
subdola vivacitate latitavit, et nunc denuo erupit.</note>, that
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
<emph>a bishop of Rome</emph> had admitted the Montanists to
communion by giving them letters of amity. Who
the bishop was he gives no hint; and as he connects
the matter with the account of the dissemination of
the heresy of Praxeas, some, as Dupin<note place='foot'>In his account of Tertullian's Treatise against Praxeas.</note> and Tillemont<note place='foot'>Tom. ii. Note 4. Sur les Montanistes.</note>,
have concluded that it could not have been
an earlier bishop than Victor, because Praxeas did
not appear as a heretic at an earlier period. This,
however, as Massuet justly argues<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dissertationes Præv.</hi> II. § 8, 9.</note>, is not conclusive;
for the throwing together two things in a narrative
by no means proves that they closely followed
each other; and this visit of Praxeas to Rome may,
with greater probability, be assumed to have been
when he was a catholic. A sufficient space of time
had evidently elapsed between the visit of Praxeas
to Rome, under the bishop who had granted communicatory
letters to the Montanists, and the time when
Tertullian was writing<note place='foot'>See Tertullian in loco.</note>, to allow of his becoming
tinged with the Patripassian heresy, of his disseminating
it secretly, of his avowing it openly, of his
being convinced of his error, and being reconciled to
the church; finally, of his relapsing, and ultimately
quitting the church. All this would take up many
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
years, and allow ample time for the supposition that
Eleutherus was the bishop alluded to; not to say
that a bishop of Rome was little likely to have
listened to him when an avowed heretic. And then
the letter of the martyrs has a well-defined object,
viz., to dissuade him from contributing to rend the
church in pieces by countenancing a set of men who
had been excommunicated by the churches by whom
they were surrounded, and by those in Gaul with
which they were in some degree connected; and
thoroughly explains the expression of Eusebius, τῆς
τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν εἰρήνης ἕνεκα πρεσβεύοντες.
</p>

<p>
There is another circumstance, which, so far as I
know, has not been adverted to: viz., that the
Montanists appear not to have differed from the
other Christians of Asia Minor in the observance of
Easter; and as we know that Victor excommunicated
those Churches for differing from him, he is not
likely to have patronized a sect who also differed
from him in a matter he regarded as so important.
</p>

<p>
As we know that the Church of Lyons sent these
letters to Eleutherus, with one of their own, preserved
in part by Eusebius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. i. 1.</note>, giving an account of the martyrdoms,
it has been supposed by some that Irenæus
actually <emph>wrote</emph> this letter; and the idea is confirmed
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
by the circumstance, that Œcumenius, in his <hi rend='italic'>Commentary
on the First Epistle of St. Peter</hi>, (cap. 3.
p. 498.) has preserved a fragment of a writing of
Irenæus, <hi rend='italic'>concerning Sanctus and Blandina</hi>. Now,
these two persons are mentioned particularly in the
letter of the Church of Lyons<note place='foot'>Euseb. V. i. 7.</note>; of which, therefore,
this fragment (numbered xiii. in the Benedictine
edition) is probably another remnant. There is no
ground for doubting that Irenæus did really visit
Rome; the more especially, as two of his subsequent
compositions were occasioned by errors of priests of
that Church&mdash;viz. Florinus and Blastus<note place='foot'>Euseb. V. xx. 1. Ἐξεναντίας τῶν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης τὸν ὑγιῆ τῆς
ἐκκλησίας θεσμὸν παραχαραττόντων, Εἰρηναῖος διαφόρους ἐπιστολὰς
συντάττει· τὴν μὲν ἐπιγράψας πρὸς Βλάστον περὶ σχίσματος· τὴν δὲ
πρὸς Φλωρῖνον περὶ μοναρχίας, ἢ περὶ τοῦ μὴ ἑἶναι τὸν Θεὸν
ποιητὴν κακῶν· ταύτης γάρ τοι τῆς γνώμης οὗτος ἐδόκει προασπίζειν·
δι᾽ ὂν αὖθις ὑποσυρόμενον τῇ κατὰ Οὐαλεντῖνον πλάνῃ, καὶ τὸ περὶ
ὀγδοάδος συντάττεται τῷ Εἰρηναίῳ σπούδασμα· ἐν ᾧ καὶ ἐπισημαίνεται
τὴν πρώτην τῶν ἀποστόλων κατειληφέναι ἑαυτὸν διαδοχήν.&mdash;&mdash;ἐν
ᾗ γε μὴν προειρήκαμεν πρὸς τὸν Φλωρῖνον ὁ Εἰρηναῖος
ἐπιστολῇ αὗθις τῆς ἅμα Πολυκάρπῳ συνουσίας αὐτοῦ μνημονεύει
λέγων· Τὰ δόγματα, κ. τ. λ.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Pothinus died in this persecution, as really a
martyr as others who have been regarded as more
truly such. Being upwards of ninety years old, suffering
under infirmity both of age and sickness,
dragged to the tribunal, and back again to prison,
without any regard to his weakness and age, beaten,
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
kicked, and assailed with every missile that came to
hand, it is more wonderful that he did not breathe
his last under their hands, than that he lingered out
two days in the prison<note place='foot'>Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. i. 14.</note>. Irenæus succeeded him<note place='foot'>Ibid. V. v. 3, supra.</note>;
and if we may judge of him by the ability, learning,
zeal, and sound judgment displayed in his writings,
and by the Christian temper he evinced on the
occasion of the paschal controversy, we may safely
conclude that he was a more than worthy successor.
</p>

<p>
Before I proceed further, I will observe a little
upon the visit of Irenæus to Rome, which appears to
have been the third application made to Rome from
any distant Church; the first being from Corinth,
under St. Clement, the second by Polycarp, to
Anicetus. The first was not unnatural, when we
consider that Clement had been the companion of
St. Paul, and that the Church of Corinth was under
pecuniary obligations to that of Rome. The second
was a consultation, as between equals. The third
was a deputation from the Churches of an adjacent
country, (civilly subject to Rome, and therefore in
the habit of visiting the city,) to expostulate with
the then bishop upon an injudicious step he had
taken. They were evidently led to it by their sympathy
with the Asiatic Churches, from whence they
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
drew their own origin, whose divisions and errors
they deplored: and they were afraid of the mischief
likely to accrue to the Christian world from the
sanction given to the Montanist errors by the head
of a Church so important as that of Rome, to which,
from its being the common resort of Christians from
all quarters, they had been in the habit of looking as
the depository of their common traditions, and whose
example therefore must be tenfold more hurtful than
that of any other Church, if given on the side of
error. It was, moreover, in all probability, an expostulation
with him for having committed the actual
error of countenancing what the whole catholic
Church, from first to last, has declared to be delusion
and heresy; and the object of it was, to entreat him
to recant his error. How contrary is this whole
matter to the notion of these Churches being subject
to that of Rome, or to their looking up to the bishop
of it as an authorized director in cases of doubt and
difficulty! And even if we do not admit that
Eleutherus was the actual bishop who gave his
letters of peace to the Montanists, yet it has always
been acknowledged that the letters of the martyrs,
thus sent by the public authority of the Gaulish
Churches, were intended to caution him against
entertaining them, and that either he or Victor did
countenance them. And how inconsistent is such
a state of things with the idea of a Church privileged
to be free from error or delusion, watching
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
over others, instead of being watched over by
them!
</p>

<p>
One other point about this visit remains to be
noticed. It has been supposed<note place='foot'>By Quesnel (see Tillemont, tom. iii. just at the end of his
account of Irenæus); and by Massuet, <hi rend='italic'>Dissert. Præv.</hi> II. § 12.</note> that Irenæus went
to Rome to be consecrated to the Church of Lyons,
or that he was consecrated there. That he <emph>went</emph>
there for any such purpose is contrary to all the
evidence we have, which specifies another cause for
his journey, and does not hint at this. Massuet,
indeed, argues, from Jerome's relating his visit to
Rome immediately before his ordination, as successor
to Pothinus<note place='foot'>See note 7, p. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>.</note>, that the two must have an explicit
connexion with each other; but the very connecting
term <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>postea</foreign>, and the reason given with it, that
Pothinus had suffered martyrdom, would rather
appear to separate the journey with its circumstances,
from the ordination with its reason. He
likewise relies upon the request of the martyrs to
Eleutherus, ἔχειν σε αὐτὸν ἐν παραθέσει<note place='foot'>See note 4, p. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</note>; which he
chooses to translate, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ut ipsum cæteris anteponas</foreign>. So
very much to be drawn from one word, reminds one
of Dodwell's theories. The expression might, indeed,
possibly have a force, which it is rather surprising
that Massuet has overlooked. It might mean <q>place
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
him by thy side,</q> which, if it had occurred to the
French divine, he would probably have translated,
<q>Elatum eum fac in eundem quem ipse tenes
ordinem:</q> <q>Make him a bishop like thyself.</q> But
when we take it in connexion with the concluding
clause, ἐν πρώτοις ἂν παρεθέμεθα, the phrase would
appear to signify nothing more than, <q>Treat him
with all respect.</q>
</p>

<p>
That he may have been consecrated when there,
if Pothinus died in the interim, is not impossible;
for it has not been unusual, in all ages of the Church,
for a bishop elect to be consecrated in the place
where he happened to be at the time of his election.
But there is no <emph>evidence</emph> for this; nothing, in short,
but the presumption, that there was no other bishop
in Gaul but the bishop of Lyons. And if there were,
as is not improbable, bishops of Autun, of Arles, and
of Vienne, at this time, then there was no motive
whatever for having recourse to the bishop of Rome,
at a period when, as is well known, the neighbouring
bishops always filled up a vacancy, with the consent
of the clergy and people, without having recourse to
any higher or ulterior authority. But supposing that
he was consecrated at Rome, it makes nothing whatever
for the supremacy of that see. I am willing to
grant to it a much higher rank and authority than
such a circumstance would vindicate for it. Ignatius,
when going to martyrdom, besought Polycarp
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
to appoint a bishop in his place; and yet no one has
thought fit, on that ground, to claim for Polycarp the
title even of primate of the East; whilst I readily
admit that the bishop of Rome was long looked up
to, not only as primate of the West, but as the first
bishop <emph>in rank</emph>, and governing the first Church <emph>in
authority</emph>, in the whole Christian world.
</p>

<p>
But whatever may be doubtful, one thing is certain,
that Irenæus <emph>did</emph> succeed Pothinus as bishop of
Lyons. Of his conduct in his own particular Church
we have no means of judging, for no record has survived
to tell us of anything he did there. It appears
certain, from the expression of Eusebius<note place='foot'>V. xxiii. 2.</note>, ἐπεσκόπει
τῶν κατὰ Γαλλίαν παροικιῶν, that he was primate, or,
at least, had influence over several dioceses in Gaul;
as παροικία in the early writers commonly signifies <emph>a
diocese</emph><note place='foot'>Bingham, IX. ii. 1.</note>. This idea is farther confirmed by the use
of a parallel expression<note place='foot'>Euseb. V. 22. Τῶν κατ᾽ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν παροικῶν.</note>, to describe the jurisdiction
of the bishop of Alexandria. It is well known that,
in the time of Athanasius, the number of dioceses
under him was near a hundred<note place='foot'>Athanas. <hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> 2. p. 788. Paris, 1527.</note>; of these, between
seventy and eighty were in Egypt, and sixteen within
seventy miles of Alexandria, and in the same civil
province of Ægyptus Prima. Over all these, the
bishop of Alexandria exercised a control more complete
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
than that of any other patriarch of those times.
I mention these circumstances to show that, at the
time to which Eusebius refers, his archiepiscopal
province must have been considerable. And as the
ecclesiastical station of Irenæus is described in the
same terms, it almost amounts to demonstration, that
he held a similar pre-eminence. The only difference
is, that Irenæus is said to have ruled the παροικιῶν
κατὰ Γαλλίαν, and the bishop of Alexandria those
κατ᾽ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν. But this expression only shows
that the Churches in Egypt emanated from Alexandria,
and were permanently dependent upon it;
whilst those in Gaul emanated from no point within
the country, nor were permanently dependent upon
any one church. If any one should suppose that the
term παροικία is used with regard to Alexandria in
its modern sense of <emph>parish</emph>, and that Eusebius is
speaking of the extent of the single diocese of
Alexandria, I will only say, that that whole diocese
contained only fourteen pastors, that the city contained
sixteen churches<note place='foot'>Bingham, IX. ii. 6.</note>; and that Socrates, who
wrote more than one hundred years after Eusebius,
when describing the distinction of the pastoral charges
in the diocese of Alexandria, merely says<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> I. 27. Εἰσὶν ὑπὸ τὴν αὐτοῦ πόλιν ὡς παροικίαι.</note>, that they
were <emph>like</emph> παροικίαι: so that this word had retained
its meaning of <emph>diocese</emph> even to that period.
</p>

<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>

<p>
Massuet, indeed, argues at great length<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dissert.</hi> II. § 13-16.</note> against
the idea that there was any other bishop in Gaul
than the bishop of Lyons; but all his arguments
resolve themselves into the one, that there is no
mention made in any early writer of any other. On
this ground one might, with equal reason, conclude
that there were no bishops in Britain before the
council of Arles, when they are first mentioned.
But until it can be shown that there is an instance
in any writer anterior to Eusebius, or of his time, of
the use of the term παροικία to signify a parochial
church or parish, the simple use of this word by him
is sufficient evidence against all negative arguments
whatever. What the author of the Acts of the
Martyrdom of St. Saturninus says<note place='foot'>Ruinart. <hi rend='italic'>Act. Mart.</hi> p. 110. cited by Massuet, <hi rend='italic'>Diss.</hi> II. §
15.</note> of the fewness
of churches in Gaul in his time is really no contradiction
to this opinion; for if there were at that
time as many as twenty or thirty, it would be
extremely few, considering the extent of the
country.
</p>

<p>
I have said that we have no record of the operations
of Irenæus as bishop of Lyons. I mean, that
we know of nothing which he did in that particular
church. He bore, in a general way, the character of
<q>the light of the western<note place='foot'>So called to distinguish them from the inhabitants of
Galatia. Theodoret. Dial. i. p. 33. ed. Sirmond:&mdash;Εἰρηναῖος τῆς
Πολυκάρπου διδασκαλίας ἀπήλαυσεν· ἐγεγόνει δὲ φωστὴρ Γαλατῶν
τῶν ἐσπερίων.</note> Gauls,</q> and is said to
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
have <q>cultivated and enlightened the Celtic nations<note place='foot'>Id. <hi rend='italic'>Hær. Fab.</hi> p. 189. Τοὺς μέντοι τῶν παλαιῶν αἱρέσεων
μύθους ἐκ τῶν παλαιῶν τῆς ἐκκλησίας διδασκάλων συνέλεξα,
Ἰουστίνου τοῦ φιλοσόφου καὶ μάρτυρος, καὶ Εἰρηναίου τοῦ τὰ
Κέλτικα καὶ γεωργήσαντος καὶ φωτίσαντος ἔθνη.</note>.</q>
And in consonance with this there is a tradition<note place='foot'>Anonymus auctor <hi rend='italic'>martyrii S. Ferreoli presbyteri, et Ferruccionis
diaconi, ac sociorum ejus</hi>, apud Surium, tom. viii. ad diem 16.
Junii. Eodem tempore quo summus Sacerdos et Martyr Ecclesiæ
Lugdunensis, S. Irenæus Episcopus Christi, lumen æternum et
splendor justitiæ, publice suam prædicationem in Galliis dederat,
et assidue verbum Domini nostri Jesu Christi gentibus declarârat,
Sanctum Ferreolum Presbyterum, et Ferruccionem Diaconum ad
Vesunsensem civitatem vere ut fundamentum fortissimum ad
fundandam supra petram Christi Ecclesiam misit: et sicut angularis
lapis sponsi cœlestis, et ut margaritæ resplendentes fulgebant,
per quos nomen æternum et splendor gloriæ gentibus, quæ
in tenebris jacebant, coruscaret; ut eorum prædicatione ad Baptismatis
gratiam convolarent in quibus erat mira virtus Christi.
In verbo enim et sapientia strenui, vultum angelicum et Domini
servitutibus aptum manifeste populis demonstrabant. Augebatur
Catholica fides, lætabantur de confuso et victo diabolo quotidie
Christiani; qui derelinquentes idola, sequebantur Christi vestigia.
Similiter Sanctus Irenæus Felicem Presbyterum, Fortunatum, et
Achilleum Diaconos, ex suo latere ante gloriosum martyrium
suum Valentiam dirigit in urbem: quibus ingressis, talem
Dominus athletis suis contulit gratiam, ut illa Paganorum multitudo,
quæ in tenebris jacebat, eos plenissimo affectu diligeret.</note>,
though of comparatively recent date, that he sent a
priest and deacon as missionaries to Besançon, and a
priest and two deacons to Valence, in Dauphiné.
The circumstance is very probable in itself, and
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
is in agreement with the traditions of those
Churches.
</p>

<p>
We now come to a more remarkable period of his
life. We have seen that the Christians of that age
looked with peculiar anxiety to Rome, as the Church
where, from the constant meeting together of Christians
from the provinces, the traditions of the catholic
Church were most accurately preserved. Any
departure of that Church from purity of doctrine
would be of more serious consequence than the deflexion
of one of less influence. Irenæus had been
taught to exercise this feeling by his mission from
the martyrs; and had no doubt learnt to feel it more
deeply on the spot, when he trode the ground consecrated
by the martyrdom of the two great apostles
with whose joint superintendence and instruction
that Church was so long favoured, and when he observed
how every heretic likewise resorted to Rome,
as a more important theatre than any other. Nor
can we suppose that he had left that Church without
forming some bond of union with individual members
of it. His heart, therefore, returned no doubt
to it, and caused him to indite those several epistles
Eusebius mentions<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. xx. 1.</note>, occasioned by the dissensions
he heard of as prevailing there. The first mentioned
by the historian is that addressed to Blastus
on the subject of <emph>schism</emph>. What it was which led
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
him into schism is variously related by ancient
writers. Eusebius simply says<note place='foot'>Ibid. 15.</note> that he indulged
in speculations of his own at variance with truth.
Theodoret<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hær. Fab.</hi> I. 23.</note> stated that he was entangled in the
errors of Marcion and Valentinus; but if he had been
so at that time, it appears most probable that Irenæus
would have noticed the errors themselves even
more prominently than the schism which accompanied
them. A more probable account is that given
by the ancient author whose addition to one of Tertullian's
works is commonly printed with it<note place='foot'>Tertull. <hi rend='italic'>de Præscript.</hi> 53.</note>, that
<q>he wished covertly to introduce Judaism;</q> and in
particular, that <q>he insisted on the observance of
the paschal season on the fourteenth day of the
moon, according to the law of Moses;</q> with which
agrees what Pacian says<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> 1.</note>, <q>that he was a Greek, and
that he adhered to the Montanists;</q> for the Montanists,
having arisen in Asia Minor, celebrated that
season at the same time as the other Christians of
that country, i. e. with the Jews. So that his schism
probably consisted in this, that having come from
Asia, he wished to raise a party favourable to the
Asiatic practice, or, at least, declined to conform to
that of Rome. And we can imagine how earnestly
Irenæus would press him to conform to the usages
of the Church in which he sojourned; a thing he
could do with so much greater authority, inasmuch
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
as, being himself of Asiatic birth, and brought up in
the very church of Polycarp, he had conformed to
the Western usage.
</p>

<p>
Whether it was before or after this time that
Blastus left the communion of the Church we know
not. Eusebius, however, relates<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. 15. Οἱ δ᾽ ἐπὶ Ῥώμης ἤκμαζον, ὧν ἡγεῖτο
Φλωρῖνος, πρεσβυτερίου τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἀποπεσὼν, Βλάστος τε σὺν
τούτῳ παραπλησίῳ, πτώματι κατεσχημένος· οἳ καὶ πλείους τῆς ἐκκλησίας
περιέλκοντες, ἐπὶ τὸ σφῶν ὑπῆγον Βούλημα· θάτερος ἰδίως
περὶ τὴν ἀλήθειαν νεωτερίζειν πειρώμενος.</note>, (at least so Massuet<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Diss.</hi> II. § 59.</note>,
with great probability, apprehends his meaning,)
that he was deposed from the priesthood, and
that he detached many from the Church to follow
speculations of his own, at variance with the truth.
Theodoret's statement may therefore be substantially
correct, although at a period subsequent to that at
which Irenæus wrote the letter Περὶ Σχίσματος.
</p>

<p>
The next letter Eusebius mentions is that to Florinus.
This person was likewise a priest of the
Church at Rome, and had been known to Irenæus
in early life<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist. ad Florinum</hi>, supra, p. 2.</note>, when they were both pupils of Polycarp,
and Florinus was high in the court of the reigning
emperor. But he had forsaken civil life, and
entered holy orders, from which he was now ejected,
as being the head of a party holding novel and peculiar
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
opinions<note place='foot'>Euseb. V. 15.</note>. His peculiarity is distinctly specified,
viz. that he taught that God was the author of
evil. To avoid this conclusion, Marcion had taught
two first principles&mdash;the one of good, the other of
evil. It was probably in combating this error that
Florinus had insisted on the unity of God, and of
his providential government, which he had expressed
by the term μοναρχία, and, from opposing one heresy
with zeal too ardent for his judgment, had fallen
into the opposite one. Irenæus, upon hearing of the
fall of his former acquaintance, felt an earnest desire
to restore him, and accordingly wrote to him, endeavouring,
as it would appear, to explain the true
notion of the μοναρχία of God, and especially to
combat his peculiar error. A fragment of this letter
is preserved by Eusebius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. xx. 2-4.</note>, and printed<note place='foot'>Fragm. ii.</note> at the end
of the best editions of the works of Irenæus. In it
Irenæus represents to him how much at variance
his opinions were with those of the Church; how
impious in their tendency; how far beyond what
any excommunicated heretic had ever taught; how
much opposed to apostolical tradition: and he appeals
to him from his own remembrance of the
teaching of Polycarp (whom they had mutually reverenced),
and from his published epistles, how
shocked that blessed martyr would have been if he
had heard such blasphemies.
</p>

<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>

<p>
But Irenæus, as it would appear, succeeded only
so far with the unstable Florinus as to drive him
from his position, that God was the author of evil.
From this he went into the Valentinian speculations,
by which they endeavour to escape the great difficulty
of the origin of evil<note place='foot'>Euseb. V. xx. 1.</note>. From them he learnt
to believe in an <foreign rend='italic'>ogdoad</foreign> of emanations from the
Supreme Being, from one of the later of whom, by
a species of accident, evil sprung. Irenæus could
not give up his ancient friend, but composed for his
use a treatise<note place='foot'>Περὶ Ὀγδοάδος.</note> upon this portion of the Gnostic
theory. Of this, however, we have not a fragment
left which can throw any light upon its structure.
There is only the concluding sentence preserved<note place='foot'>Euseb. V. xx. 2, and Fragm. i. of the Benedictine edition.
Ὀρκίζω σε τὸν μεταγραψόμενον τὸ βιβλίον τοῦτο, κατὰ τοῦ Κυρίου
ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, καὶ κατὰ τῆς ἐνδόξου παρουσίας αὐτοῦ, ἦς
ἔρχεται κρῖναι ζῶντας καὶ νεκροὺς, ἵνα ἀντιβάλῃς ὃ μετεγράψω,
καὶ κατορθώσῃς αὐτὸ πρὸς ἀντίγραφον τοῦτο, ὄθεν μετεγράψω,
ἐπιμελῶς· καὶ τὸν ὅρκον τοῦτον ὁμοίως μεταγράψῃς, καὶ θήσεις ἐν
τῷ ἀντιγράφω.</note>,
in which he adjures the transcriber of it to compare
it most carefully with the original, and to append
the adjuration itself to his transcript. We might
wonder, perhaps, at the solemnity of the adjuration,
did we not consider how important it was that
Irenæus himself should not be represented, by any
error of the copyist, as holding opinions at variance
with the truth he was so anxious to maintain.
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
But although we have no distinct remains of this
particular treatise, it is highly probable that it formed
the germ of that great work which has, in some sort,
remained entire, and upon which the reputation of
Irenæus, as a controversial writer, altogether rests.
To that I will now direct my attention.
</p>

<p>
The Gnostic theories had risen in the East, and
from thence had early spread to Rome; whither
came, in succession, most of their eminent teachers.
It is not my purpose to give a full account of them.
This has been done by the late Dr. E. Burton, in his
Bampton Lectures, <q><hi rend='italic'>On the heresies of the apostolical
age</hi>,</q> and the notes appended to them. I shall, however,
give in detail Irenæus's account of them in a
subsequent part of this work. The general principle
of them all was to escape making God the author of
evil, by making it to spring, by a species of chance,
from some emanation indefinitely removed from the
great First Cause. For this purpose, they imagined
certain spiritual beings, more or less numerous, the
first pair produced by the Supreme Being, in conjunction
with an emanation from himself; the rest
emanating, for the most part, successively from each
preceding pair, and becoming more and more liable
to infirmity as they were further distant from the
One Original. From one of the most distant they
imagined the author of evil to have sprung, whom
they also made the creator of the world, and the god
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
of the Jews. They professed to believe in Jesus,
but regarded him either as not truly man or as not
truly united with the Godhead; and Christ, as well
as the Only-begotten, the Saviour, and the Life,
they looked on as distinct from him.
</p>

<p>
The great charm of these theories was, that they
professed to unravel a great secret, which no previous
philosophy had reached, and which Christianity
itself had left untouched. We may wonder, indeed,
that any Christian should have found anything to
tempt him in hypotheses so subtile and intricate, and
so palpably at variance with the known truths of the
Gospel. But we must bear in mind that when they
first arose, no part of the New-Testament scripture
was written; that consequently the poison had time
to mix itself with the current of opinion everywhere,
before an antidote of general application was provided;
that the minds of all inquiring men in those
times were peculiarly given to subtilties, and to the
notion of inventing schemes selected from all prevailing
opinions; and that, to recommend themselves
to Christians, they professed to be the depositories
of that <q>hidden wisdom</q> which St. Paul was known
to have affirmed that he had imparted to those who
were capable of receiving it. It is, therefore, not
much to be wondered at, that they prevailed amongst
the speculative for their very subtilty, and with the
vain and weak-minded by their affectation of superior
wisdom.
</p>

<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>

<p>
There was another feature of the scheme, which
served a further purpose. They pretended that the
minds which inhabit human bodies are of two kinds,
<emph>spiritual</emph> and <emph>carnal</emph>; that the carnal alone are the
work of the Creator of this world, whilst the spiritual
are emanations from the highest and purest order of
spiritual beings: that the carnal are readily contaminated
by the flesh and the world, and thence
require restraint and law; whilst the spiritual are
only placed in bodies for a time, that they may <emph>know</emph>
everything, but incapable of contamination, and
destined, after a period of exercise, to be taken up
into the Supernal Fulness. By this theory the abstracted
and mystical were flattered with the idea of
spiritual superiority to their fellow-men; whilst the
worldly and sensual might keep up the highest pretensions,
and yet wallow in the most revolting profligacy.
It was under this latter phase that Gnosticism
first showed itself amongst the half-civilized,
semi-Roman inhabitants of southern Gaul. In its
more abstract and refined form it would have had
no attraction for them; for the European mind is
too plain and common-sense to follow subtilties.
But its practical licentiousness found a fit nidus in
the accompanying sensual disposition which marked
the Romans of that age, and all who were tinged
with their blood. It worked its way for some time
in silence, till the attention of the bishop of Lyons
was drawn to it by the seduction of Christian matrons,
and by the influx of extraordinary impurity throughout
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
that region<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Adv. Hær.</hi> I. v. 3. οἱ δὲ καὶ ταῖς τῆς σαρκός ἡδοναῖς κατακόρωσ
δουλεύοντες, τὰ σαρκικὰ τοῖς σαρκικοῖς, καὶ τὰ πνευματικὰ
τοῖς πνευματικοῖς ἀποδίδοσθαι λέγουσι. Καὶ οἱ μὲν αὐτῶν λάθρα τὰς
διδασκομένας ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν τὴν διδαχὴν ταύτην γυναῖκας διαφθείρουσιν,
ὡς πολλάκις ὑπ᾽ ἐνίων αὐτῶν ἐξαπατηθεῖσαι, ἔπειπα ἐπιστρέψασαι
γυναῖκες εἰς τὴν Ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ Θεοῦ, σὺν τῇ λοιπῇ πλάνῃ καὶ
τοῦτο ἐξωμολογήσαντο. οἱ δὲ καὶ κατὰ τὸ φανερὸν ἀπερυθριάσαντες,
ὧν ἂν ἐρασθῶσι γυναικῶν, ταύτας ἀπ᾽ ἀνδρῶν ἀποσπάσαντες,
ἰδίας γαμετὰς ἡγήσαντο. ἄλλοι δὲ αὖ πάλιν σεμνῶς κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς,
ὡς μετὰ ἀδελφῶν προσποιούμενοι συνοικεῖν, προϊόντος τοῦ χρόνου
ηλέγχθησαν, ἐγκύμονος τῆς ἀδελφῆς ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ γενηθείσης.
</p>
<p>
Ib. xiii. 7. Τοιαῦτα δὲ λέγοντες καὶ πράττοντες, καὶ ἐν τοῖς καθ᾽
ἡμᾶς κλίμασι τῆς Ῥοδανουσίας, πολλὰς ἐξηπατήκασι γυναῖκας,
αἵτινες κεκαυτηριασμέναι τὴν συνείδησιν, αἱ μὲν καὶ εἰς φανερὸν
ἐξομολογοῦνται, αἱ δὲ δυσωπούμεναι τοῦτο, ἡσυχῆ δέ πως ἑαυτὰς,
ἀπηλπικυῖαι τῆς ζωῆς τοῦ Θεοῦ, ἔνιαι μὲν εἰς τὸ παντελὲς ἀπέστησαν,
ἔνιαι δὲ ἐπαμφοτερίζουσι, καὶ τὸ τῆς παροιμίας πεπόνθασι,
μήτε ἔξω, μήτε ἔσω οὖσαι, ταύτην ἔχουσαι τὴν ἐπικαρπίαν τοῦ σπέρματος
τῶν τέκνων τῆς γνώσεως.</p></note>. He was thus led to trace the
mischief to its cause; and finding this to be his old
enemy, under its then prevailing form of Valentinianism,
which thus appeared to be rearing its head
everywhere, and had now come to assail him on his
own ground, he set himself to understand its system
thoroughly, that, by refuting it both in its principle
and in its details, he might completely disabuse the
Christian world, do away with the divisions, and impurities,
and calumnies, arising from it, and thus
afford the freer scope for the power of truth upon
the hearts and practice of men.
</p>

<p>
He was the more determined upon doing this by
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
the solicitations of a friend, who appears to have
lived more in the heart of the mischief than himself<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv. Hær.</hi> I. Præf. 3. Οὐκ ἐπιζητήσεις δὲ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν τῶν ἐκ
Κελτοῖς διατριβόντων, καὶ περὶ βάρβαρον διάλεκτον τὸ πλεῖστον
ἀσχολουμένων, λόγων τέχνην, ἣν οὐκ ἐμάθομεν, οὔτε δύναμιν συγγράφεως,
ἣν οὐκ ἠσκήσαμεν, οὔτε καλλωπισμὸν λέξεων, οὔτε πιθανότητα,
ἧν οὐκ οἴδαμεν· ἀλλὰ ἁπλῶς, καὶ ἀληθῶς, καὶ ἰδιωτικῶς τὰ
μετὰ ἀγάπης σοι γραφέντα, μετὰ ἀγάπης σὺ προσδέξῃ· καὶ αὐτὸς
αὐξήσεις αὐτὰ παρὰ σεαυτῷ, ἅτε ἰκανώτερος ἡμῶν τυγχάνων, οἱονεὶ
σπέρματα καὶ ἀρχὰς λαβὼν παρ᾽ ἡμῶν, καὶ ἐν τῷ πλάτει σου τοῦ
νοῦ ἐπὶ πολὺ καρποφορήσεις τὰ δι᾽ ὀλίγων ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν εἰρημένα, καὶ
δυνατῶς παραστήσεις τοῖς μετὰ σοῦ τὰ ἀσθενῶς ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἀπηγγελμένα.
καὶ ὡς ἡμεῖς ἐφιλοτιμήθημεν, πάλαι ζητοῦντός σου μαθεῖν
τὴν γνώμην αὐτῶν, μὴ μόνον σοι ποιῆσαι φανερὰν, ἀλλὰ καὶ
ἐφόδια δοῦναι πρὸς τὸ ἐπιδεικνύειν αὐτὴν ψευδῆ· οὕτω δὲ καὶ σὺ
φιλοτίμως τοῖς λοιποῖς διακονήσεις, κατὰ τὴν χάριν τὴν ὑπὸ τοῦ
Κυρίου σοὶ δεδομένην, εἰς τὸ μηκέτι παρασύρεσθαι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
ὑπὸ τῆς ἐκείνων πιθανολογίας, οὔσης τοιαύτης.</note>.
Who he was we are not told. That he had
some pastoral charge is most probable, from the concluding
portion of the preface to the first book, in
which Irenæus speaks to his friend as having spiritual
care of others, and as able, both by his station and
by his abilities, to turn to the best account the hints
he was able to furnish him. That the native, or at
least customary, language of his friend was Greek,
may be inferred from the work being in that language,
and by the apology made for the imperfections
of the style; and altogether, it seems most
probable that he was a bishop of one of the Greek
colonies of southern Gaul.
</p>

<p>
In the accomplishment of this work he no doubt
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
made use of the treatise of Justin Martyr against the
Marcionites, now lost to us, because superseded by
the completer work of Irenæus. But he derived the
greatest help from the writings of the Gnostics themselves,
from which he learnt their scheme without
any possibility of doubt or gainsaying, and thus was
enabled, by the mere <emph>statement</emph>, in open light, of its
fantastic puerilities, to unclothe it of the mystery
which was one of its chief recommendations, to demonstrate
more clearly its self-contradictions, and to
contrast it in its naked folly with the simplicity of
acknowledged truth<note place='foot'>I. Præf. 2. Ἵνα οὖν μὴ παρὰ τὴν ἡμετέραν αἰτίαν συναρπάζωνταί
τινες, ὡς πρόβατα ὑπὸ λύκων, ἀγνοοῦντες αὐτοὺς, διὰ τὴν
ἔξωθεν τῆς προβατείου δορᾶς ἐπιβουλὴν, οὓς φυλάσσειν παρήγγελκεν
ἡμῖν Κύριος, ὅμοια μὲν λαλοῦντας, ἀνόμοια δὲ φρονοῦντας·
ἀναγκαῖον ἡγησάμην, ἐντυχὼν τοῖς ὑπομνήμασι τῶν, ὡς αὐτοὶ
λέγουσιν, Οὐαλεντίνου μαθητῶν, ἐνίοις δ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ συμβαλὼν,
καὶ καταλαβόμενος τὴν γνώμην αὐτῶν, μήνυσαί σοι, ἀγαπητὲ, τὰ
τερατώδη καὶ βαθέα μυστήρια, ἃ οὐ πάντες χωροῦσιν, ἐπεὶ μὴ
πάντες τὸν ἐγκέφαλον ἐξεπτύκασιν· ὅπως καὶ σὺ μαθὼν αὐτὰ, πᾶσι
τοῖς μετὰ σοῦ φανερὰ ποιήσῃς, καὶ παραινέσῃς αὐτοῖς φυλάξασθαι
τὸν βυθὸν τῆς ἀνοίας, καὶ τῆς εἰς Χριστὸν βλασφημίας.</note>.
</p>

<p>
To the ascertaining of the date of this composition
we have but two certain guides. One is, the list of
bishops of Rome given in the beginning of the third
book<note place='foot'>III. iii. 1. given at length in ch. II. of this work.</note>. The catalogue closes with the name of Eleutherus,
and thus shows that that book, at least, was
begun, and most probably published, under his pontificate,
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
which began about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 177. The other
is, that in the same book the author mentions the
translation of the Old Testament by Theodotion<note place='foot'>III. xxi. 1. given at length in the chapter <hi rend='italic'>on the Canon, &amp;c.
of Holy Scripture</hi>.</note>.
Now that translation was not made till about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
184<note place='foot'>See Epiphan. <hi rend='italic'>de Pond. et Mens.</hi> § 17. and the <hi rend='italic'>Alexandrian
Chronicle</hi>, quoted by Massuet, <hi rend='italic'>Diss.</hi> II. § 47.</note>. Irenæus would not become acquainted with it
immediately; so that we are driven towards the end
of the pontificate of Eleutherus, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 192,
for the publication of the third book. The work
appears to have grown upon the hands of the writer,
and to have become more than twice as voluminous
as when it was first planned<note place='foot'>Book I. xxxi. 4. Cum igitur hæc sic se habeant, quatenus
promisi, secundum nostram virtutem inferemus eversionem ipsorum,
omnibus eis contradicentes in sequenti libro: (enarratio
enim in longum pergit, ut vides:) et viatica quoque dabimus ad
eversionem ipsorum, occurrentes omnibus sententiis secundum
narrationis ordinem: ut simus non tantum ostendentes, sed et
vulnerantes undique bestiam.</note>. The books were
written separately, as he found his matter arrange
itself, and the two first apparently sent first<note place='foot'>III. Præf. Misimus tibi libros, ex quibus primus quidem
omnium illorum sententias continet, et consuetudines, et characteres
ostendit conversationis eorum. In secundo vero destructa
et eversa sunt quæ ab ipsis male docentur, et nudata, et ostensa
sunt talia qualia et sunt. In hoc autem tertio ex Scripturis inferemus
ostensiones, ut nihil tibi ex his, quæ præceperas, desit a
nobis; sed et, præterquam opinabaris, ad arguendum et evertendum
eos, qui quolibet modo male docent, occasiones a nobis accipias.
Quæ enim est in Deo charitas, dives et sine invidia exsistens,
plura donat quam postulet quis ab ea. Memento igitur
eorum quæ diximus in prioribus duobus libris; et hæc illis adjungens,
plenissimam habebis a nobis adversus omnes hæreticos
contradictionem, et fiducialiter ac instantissime resistes eis pro
sola vera ac vivifica fide, quam ab Apostolis Ecclesia percepit,
et distribuit filiis suis. Etenim Dominus omnium dedit Apostolis
suis potestatem Evangelii, per quos et veritatem, hoc est, Dei
Filii doctrinam cognovimus; quibus et dixit Dominus: Qui vos
audit, me audit: et qui vos contemnit, me contemnit, et eum qui
me misit.</note>,
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
followed by the three others at distinct intervals<note place='foot'>Ib. &amp; IV. Præf. 1. Hunc quartum librum, dilectissime, transmittens
tibi, operis quod est de detectione et eversione falsæ cognitionis,
quemadmodum promisimus, per Domini sermones ea, quæ
prædiximus, confirmabimus.&mdash;&mdash;V. Præf. Traductis, dilectissime,
omnibus hæreticis in quatuor libris, qui sunt tibi ante hunc a nobis
editi, et doctrinis ipsorum manifestatis; eversis quoque his, qui
irreligiosas adinvenerunt sententias, aliquid quidem ex propria
uniuscujusque illorum doctrina, quam in suis conscriptis reliquerunt;
aliquid autem ex ratione, universis ostensionibus procedente;
et veritate ostensa, et manifestato præconio Ecclesiæ,
quod Prophetæ quidem præconaverunt, quemadmodum demonstravimus,
perfecit autem Christus, Apostoli vero tradiderunt, a
quibus Ecclesia accipiens, per universum mundum sola bene custodiens,
tradidit filiis suis; quæstionibusque omnibus solutis,
quæ ab hæreticis nobis proponuntur; et Apostolorum doctrina
explanata, et manifestatis pluribus, quæ a Domino per parabolas
et dicta sunt et facta: in hoc libro quinto, operis universi, quod
est de traductione et eversione falso cognominatæ agnitionis, ex
reliquis doctrinæ Domini nostri, et ex Apostolicis epistolis,
conabimur ostensiones facere.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The general object of the first book is to give a
full exposition of the Gnostic doctrines<note place='foot'>I. Præf. 2. Καὶ, καθὼς δύναμις ἡμῖν, τήν τε γνώμην αὐτῶν
τῶν νῦν παραδιδασκόντων, λέγω δὴ τῶν περὶ Πτολεμαῖον, ἀπάνθισμα
οὖσαν τῆς Οὐαλεντίνου σχολῆς, συντόμως καὶ σαφῶς ἀπαγγελοῦμεν.</note>. The first
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
seven chapters contain a detailed account of the
system of Valentinus, who was at that time the most
fashionable teacher of those doctrines. The eighth
gives the Valentinian explanation of numerous passages
of Scripture, which they brought forward as
corroborative of the truth of their system, although
they did not pretend to rest it upon them; and the
ninth refutes those explanations. The tenth points
out the unity of Catholic doctrine, and the remaining
chapters are occupied in exhibiting the discrepancies
of the various Gnostic sects and teachers.
</p>

<p>
The object of the second book is to overthrow the
system, both in its principle and in its details, by
demonstrating its contradictoriness and impossibility<note place='foot'>II. Præf. 2. In hoc autem libro instruemus quæ nobis apta
sunt, et quæ permittit tempus, et evertemus per magna capitula
omnem ipsorum regulam: quapropter, quod sit detectio et eversio
sententiæ ipsorum, operis hujus conscriptionem ita titulavimus.
Oportet enim absconditas ipsorum conjugationes, per manifestarum
conjugationum indicium et eversionem, Bythum dissolvere;
et quoniam neque fuerit aliquando, neque sit, accipere
ostensionem.</note>.
The first nineteen chapters are occupied in the
destruction of the system; the next five are a fuller
refutation of their arguments in support of it than
he had given in chapter nine of the first book; and
the twenty-sixth, twenty-seventh, and twenty-eighth
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
lay down certain rules for the proper study of the
Scriptures. The rest of the book is taken up with
a fuller consideration and refutation of particular
opinions held by Gnostics.
</p>

<p>
Irenæus himself states it to be the object of the
third book to confute the heretical system by Scripture,
as containing in writing the undoubted doctrine
of those apostles through whose preaching the
economy of salvation was originally revealed, and
from whom the Church received the doctrine she
preached<note place='foot'>See note 10 above, p. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>.</note>. But since the heretics appealed to tradition
as interpreting Scripture, he likewise appeals
to it in the second, third, and fourth chapters<note place='foot'>See III. ii. 1. quoted in the chapter on <hi rend='italic'>Tradition</hi>.</note>; and
having shown that it is totally adverse to the heretical
doctrine, he returns to the argument from Scripture<note place='foot'>III. v. 1.</note>,
and carries it on by quotations briefly from
the Old Testament, and more fully from the words
of the evangelists and apostles, showing, to the end
of the fifteenth chapter, that they knew but one
God, and from thence to the end of the twenty-second
chapter, that they taught but one Jesus
Christ, truly God and truly man. The twenty-third
is a refutation of Tatian's opinion, that Adam was
not saved; and the two last contain sundry general
reflections.
</p>

<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>

<p>
Our author had confined himself in the third book
for the most part to the testimony of evangelists and
apostles; he informs us, that his object in the fourth
is to show that our Lord himself testified of only one
God, his Father, the maker and governor of the
world, the author of the old and new covenants, and
the judge of all mankind<note place='foot'>See IV. Præf. 1. quoted above, p. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>. and i. 1. Cum sit igitur
hoc firmum et constans, neminem alterum Deum et Dominum
a Spiritu prædicatum, nisi eum qui dominatur omnium Deus, cum
Verbo suo, et eos qui adoptionis Spiritum accipiunt, hoc est, eos
qui credunt in unum et verum Deum, et Christum Jesum Filium
Dei; similiter et Apostolos neminem alium a semetipsis Deum
appellasse, aut Dominum cognominasse; multo autem magis
Dominum nostrum, qui et nobis præcepit neminem Patrem confiteri,
nisi eum qui est in cœlis, qui est unus Deus, et unus Pater.</note>. He does not carry on
his argument with much regularity, and it would be
difficult to give any useful analysis of it. But he
discusses, towards the end, in chapters thirty-seven,
thirty-eight, and thirty-nine, the great question of
the accountability of man, and the freedom of the
will.
</p>

<p>
In the preface to the fifth book<note place='foot'>See V. Præf. quoted above, p. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</note>, he announces
his intention of carrying on the argument by quotations
from the writings of the apostle Paul, to show
that the same God who had spoken to Abraham and
given the law had in the latter days sent his Son to
give salvation to human flesh; which he pursues in
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
the first eighteen chapters, dwelling particularly on
the doctrine of the resurrection of the flesh (chap.
7-14), and corroborating S. Paul's doctrine from
other parts of Scripture. He is thence led to the
object and end of the scheme of salvation by Christ,
and the opposition to it by Satan (chap. 19-24),
especially the great opposition to it through the
agency of antichrist (chap. 24-30), and passes from
the notice of the state of departed souls (chap. 31)
to exhibit and confirm his opinion of the terrestrial
reign of Christ and the righteous (chap. 32-35),
concluding with the consummation of all things in
the eternal felicity of the just.
</p>

<p>
It will be seen by this slight sketch that the
former part of the treatise is by far the most regular;
and for this sufficient reason, that it was
more completely studied and digested before it was
written. In the latter books, he adheres but imperfectly
to the intention announced in the preface, and
introduces much matter which was evidently suggested
casually as he was writing, by some word or
expression he found himself using.
</p>

<p>
The work, as I have said, was written in Greek;
but the greater portion of the original has been lost.
What remains has been preserved by various authors
in the form of quotations. In this way two-thirds of
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
the first book have come down to us; a few detached
fragments in the latter half of the second; considerably
larger and more numerous portions of the third;
very little of the fourth, but copious extracts from
the fifth, especially near the beginning. The whole,
however, existed in the ninth century, as we learn
from the testimony of Photius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Bibliotheca</hi>, cod. 120.</note>. But, although we
have lost the greater part of the original, an ancient
Latin translation of the whole work has been preserved
to us. The precise antiquity of this version
we are unable to ascertain; but the closeness with
which Tertullian appears to follow it in many passages<note place='foot'>Massuet, <hi rend='italic'>Diss.</hi> II. §. 53. Quisquis Irenæum Latinum cum
Tertulliano contulerit, e vestigio deprehendet adeo hunc vestigia
illius premere, adeo verbis ipsis, verborumque figuris et ordini
adhærere, ut id unum sibi proposuisse videatur, paucioribus contrahere,
iisdem sæpe servatis verbis, immixtis tamen pro more
dicteriis, quæ ille fusioribus exsequutus est. Sic Irenæus, lib. I.
cap. xi. n. 3. Epiphanis sententiam referens, scribit: <q>Est quidem
ante omnes Proarche, proanennoëtos, et inenarrabilis, et innominabilis,
quam ego monotetem voco. Cum hac monotete est
virtus, quam et ipsam voco henotetem. Hæc henotes et monotes,
cum sint unum, emiserunt, cum nihil emiserint, principium omnium
noeton, et agenneton, et aoraton, quam archem sermo
monada vocat. Cum hac monade est virtus ejusdem substantiæ
ei, quam et eam voco hen. Hæ autem virtutes, id est, monotes
et henotes, et monas, et hen, emiserunt reliquas emissiones Æonum.</q>
Tertullianus vero cap. 37. <q>Est,</q> inquit, <q>ante omnia
Proarche, inexcogitabile et inenarrabile, quod ego nomino monoteta.
Cum hac erat alia virtus, quam et ipsam appello henoteta.
Monotes et henotes, id est, solitas et unitas, cum unum essent,
protulerunt, non proferentes, initium omnium intellectuale,
innascibile, invisibile, quod sermo monada vocavit. Huic
adest consubstantiva virtus, quam appellat unio. Hæ igitur
virtutes, solitas, singularitas, unitas, unio, cæteras prolationes
Æonum propagarunt.</q> Ubi eadem verba, (nisi quod
Græca quædam Latine vertuntur,) eadem styli barbaries, atque
apud Irenæi interpretem occurrunt. Hic n. 5. <q>Alii rursus
ipsorum primam et archegonon octonationem his nominibus
nominaverunt: primum Proarchen, deinde Anennoëton, tertiam
autem Arrheton, et quartam Aoraton. Et de prima quidem
Proarche emissum esse primo et quinto loco Archen; ex Anennoëto
secundo et sexto loco Acatalepton; et de Arrheto tertio et
septimo loco Anonomaston; de Aorato autem quarto et octavo
loco Agenneton.</q> Tertullianus, cap. 25. totidem verbis: <q>Primo
enim constituunt Proarchen, secundo Anennoëton, tertio Arrheton,
quarto Aoraton. Ex Proarche itaque processisse primo et quinto
loco Archen; ex Anennoëto, secundo et sexto loco Acatalepton;
ex Arrheto, tertio et septimo loco Anonomaston; ex Invisibili,
quarto et octavo loco Agenneton.</q> Certe si e Græco immediate
exscripsisset omnia hæc Tertullianus, tot nomina Græca Latine
vertisset; nec fortuito et casu fieri potuit ut hoc illi cum Irenæi
interprete convenerit. Hic cap. xii. n. 3. Colorbaseorum hypothesim
sic exponit. <q>Quando cogitavit aliquid emittere Propator,
hoc Pater vocatus est; at ubi quæ emisit, vera fuerunt, hoc
Alethia vocatum est. Cum ergo voluit semetipsum ostendere,
hoc Anthropos dictus est. Quos autem præcogitaverat posteaquam
emisit, hoc Ecclesia vocata est. Loquutus est Anthropos
Logon, hic est primogenitus Filius. Subsequitur autem Logon
Zoe, et sic prima octonatio completa est.</q> Ille cap. 36. <q>Quum,
inquiunt, cogitavit proferre, hoc Pater dictus est; quum
protulit, quia vera protulit, hic Veritas appellata est. Quum
semetipsum voluit probari, hoc Homo pronuntiatus est. Quos
autem præcogitavit, cum protulit, tunc Ecclesia nuncupata est.
Sonuit Homo Sermonem, et hic est primogenitus Filius: et
Sermoni accessit Vita, et ogdoas prima conclusa est.</q> Plura
alia similia passim occurrunt apud Tertullianum. Sed quod
demum ostendit hunc non e Græco, sed ex interprete Irenæi
sumpsisse quæ refert, illud est, quod ubi lapsus est interpres
Græca perperam reddens, lapsus est et Tertullianus. Ille, ut jam
dixi, nomen Ἐπιφανὴς appellativum esse putans, male omnino
vertit <q>clarus.</q> Tertullianus similiter errantem sequutus scripsit,
<q>insignior.</q> Irenæus, cap. ii. n. 3. Sophiæ perturbationem enarrans,
scribit eam, fœtum informem cum peperisset, <q>primo quidem
contristatam propter inconsummationem generationis, post deinde,
φοβηθῆναι μὴ καὶ αὐτὸ τέλος ἔχῃ.</q> Sic saltem legit interpres;
vertit enim, <q>timuisse ne hoc ipsum finem habeat;</q> ubi τέλος
<q>perfectionem,</q> non <q>finem</q> vertendum erat, ut in notis ad hunc
locum diximus. Nec melius Tertullianus, cap. 10. <q>primo
quidem contristari propter inconsummationem generationis, et
metuere postremo, ne finis quoque insisteret.</q> Ubi similiter
τὸ ἀτελὲς τῆς γεννήσεως vertit <q>inconsummationem generationis;</q>
et relicto Irenæo Græco, Latinum interpretem sequutus
scripsit, <q>ne quoque finis insisteret.</q> Eodem cap. n. 4.
refert Irenæus, quod Pater per Monogenem emiserit Horon in
imagine sua, ἀσύζυγον, ἀθήλυντον: ubi interpres perperam legens
ἀσυζύγῳ, ἀθηλύντῳ, vel, ut alii volunt, ἀῥῥενοθήλει, perperam et
vertit, <q>sine conjuge masculo-fœmina.</q> Eadem culpa tenetur et
Tertullianus, cap. cit. <q>Pater per Monogenem Nun, quem supra
diximus Horon, in hæc promit in imagine sua fœmina-mare.</q>
Nempe uterque id ad imaginem refert, quod Horo soli convenire
posse recta ratio demonstrat. Culpam hanc non sustineret Tertullianus,
si textum Græcum hic potius quam interpretem consuluisset.
Paulo post, Sophian ab Horo mundatam et confirmatam,
ac suæ restitutam conjugationi cum dixisset Irenæus, addit:
Χωρισθείσης γὰρ τῆς ἐνθυμήσεως ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς σὺν τῷ ἐπιγινομένῳ
πάθει, αὐτὴν μὲν ἐντὸς Πληρώματος μεῖναι· τὴν δὲ ἐνθύμησιν αὐτῆς
σὺν τῷ πάθει ὑπὸ τοῦ Ὅρου ἀφορισθῆναι καὶ ἀποσταυρωθῆναι. Quæ
sic reddidit interpres: <q>Separata enim intentione ab ea, cum
appendice passione, ipsam quidem infra Pleroma perseverasse:
concupiscentiam vero ejus cum passione ab Horo separatam, et
crucifixam, et extra cum factam esse, &amp;c.</q> ubi duo peccat, primum
quod, σὺν τῷ ἐπιγινομένῳ πάθει, vertit, <q>cum appendice passione;</q>
vertendum erat, <q>cum passione quæ supervenerat.</q> Secundum,
quod ἀποσταυρωθῆναι vertit, <q>crucifixam;</q> hic significat, quasi
<q>vallo cinctam et disjunctam</q> a Pleromate. Eadem omnino
peccat et Tertullianus, scribens: <q>Enthymesin ejus et illam
appendicem passionem ab Horo relegatam et crucifixam.</q> Hæc
et plura alia, quæ identidem in notis observavi, invicte, ni fallor,
probant, Tertullianum, ut Græcum Irenæum legerit, (quod non
nego) ab eo tamen sæpe defecisse, ut Latini interpretis, et quidem
interdum errantis, vestigia sectaretur.</note>,
and in particular his making the very same
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
mistakes as the interpreter, (as for instance, in regard
to the <emph>name</emph> of the heretic Epiphanes, which they
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
have both rendered by an <emph>epithet</emph>, and others instanced
by Massuet,) almost amounts to a demonstration
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
that he had read that version. That it
existed in the time of S. Augustin, is certain, as he
quotes it at least twice, almost word for word<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Julianum Pelagianum</hi>, I. c. 3. he has quoted the last
clause of IV. ii. 7; and c. 7. the last paragraph of V. xvii. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The effect of this great work appears to have been
decisive, for we hear no more of any eminent person
who held the Gnostic opinions. They prevailed to a
certain degree for the greater part of another century,
but they did not make head again. The name,
indeed, continued to have so great a charm, that
Clement of Alexandria took it from the heretics, and
applied it to an intelligent Christian, whom he depicts
as the only true Gnostic. But the system, as a whole,
became so entirely extinct that scarce a trace of its
influence remains, except in the writings of those
who had to combat it.
</p>

<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>

<p>
In his opposition to the Gnostics, Irenæus had to
combat a <emph>heresy</emph>; the next circumstance which
brought him forward was, a <emph>schism</emph> which threatened
to separate a portion of the Christian world from the
communion of its most influential Church. There
had been a variation in very early times, and indeed
from the beginning, between the Churches of Asia
Minor, Syria, and Mesopotamia on the one hand,
and the rest of the Christian world on the other, in
regard to the keeping of Easter;&mdash;other Churches
uniting in keeping Easter-day on a Sunday, whilst
the Christians of those countries kept it at the
Jewish passover, on whatever day of the week it
happened to fall<note place='foot'><p>Eusebius indeed says (V. xxiii. 1) that the Churches of <emph>all
Asia</emph> were united in differing from the rest of the world; but it is
evident, from chap. xxv. that he means Asia Minor; for he mentions
the bishops of Jerusalem, Cæsarea, Tyre, and Ptolemais, as
asserting that the Church of Alexandria agreed with them in their
present practice, which was the same as that of the West.
</p>
<p>
Τῆς Ἀσίας ἁπάσης αἱ παροικίαι, ὡς ἐκ παραδόσεως ἀρχαιοτέρας,
σελήνης τὴν τεσσαρεσκαιδεκάτην ᾥοντο δεῖν ἐπὶ τῆς τοῦ σωτηρίου
πάσχα ἑορτῆς παραφυλάττειν, ἐν ᾗ θύειν τὸ πρόβατον Ἰουδαίοις
προηγόρευτο· ὡς δέον ἐκπαντὸς κατὰ ταύτην, ὁποίᾳ δ᾽ ἂν ἡμέρᾳ τῆς
ἑβδομάδος περιτυγχάνοι, τὰς τῶν ἀσιτιῶν ἐπιλύσεις ποιεῖσθαι· οὐκ
ἔθους ὄντος τοῦτον ἐπιτελεῖν τὸν τρόπον ταῖς ἀνὰ τήν λοιπὴν
ἄπασαν οἰκουμένην ἐκκλησίαις, ἐξ ἀποστολικῆς παραδόσεως τὸ καὶ
εἰς δεῦρο κρατῆσαν ἔθος φυλαττούσαις· ὡς μηδ᾽ ἑτέρᾳ προσήκειν
παρὰ τὴν τῆς ἀναστάσεως τοῦ Σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἡμέραν τὰς νηστείας
ἐπιλύεσθαι.</p></note>. The inconvenience had been felt
in the time of S. Polycarp, who sojourning in Rome
in the time of its bishop Anicetus, they endeavoured
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
each to persuade the other to embrace the practice
he followed. But their conferences were without
any other effect than to cause both parties to agree
to differ in peace<note place='foot'>As appears by the following Fragment of Irenæus's Epistle
to Victor, quoted by Euseb. V. xxiv. 5. Καὶ οἱ πρὸ Σωτῆρος
πρεσβύτεροι οἱ προστάντες τῆς ἐκκλησίας, ἧς νῦν ἀφηγῇ, Ἀνίκητον
λέγομεν καὶ Πίον, Ὕγῖνόν τε καὶ Τελεσφόρον, καὶ Ξύστον,
οὔτε αὐτοὶ ἐτήρησαν, οὔτε τοῖς μετ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἐπέτρεπον. καὶ οὐδὲν
ἔλαττον αὐτοὶ μὴ τηροῦντες, εἰρήνευον τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν παροικιῶν,
ἐν αἷς ἐτηρεῖτο, ἐρχομένοις πρὸς αὐτοὺς, καίτοι μᾶλλον ἐνάντιον
ἦν τὸ τηρεῖν τοῖς μὴ τηροῦσι· καὶ οὐδέποτε διὰ τὸ εἶδος τοῦτο
ἀπεβλήθησάν τινες. ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοὶ μὴ τηροῦντες, οἱ πρὸ σοῦ πρεσβύτεροι,
τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν παροικιῶν τηροῦσιν ἔπεμπον εὐχαριστίαν.
Καὶ τοῦ μακαρίου Πολυκάρπου ἐπιδημήσαντος τῇ Ῥώμῃ ἐπὶ
Ἀνικήτου, καὶ περὶ ἄλλων τινῶν μικρὰ σχόντες πρὸς ἀλλήλους,
εὐθὺς εἰρήνευσαν, περὶ τούτου τοῦ κεφαλαίου μὴ φιλεριστήσαντες
ἑαυτούς. οὔτε γὰρ ὁ Ἀνίκητος τὸν Πολύκαρπον πεῖσαι ἐδύνατο μὴ
τηρεῖν, ἅτε μετὰ Ἰωάννου τοῦ μαθητοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν, καὶ λοιπῶν
ἀποστόλων οἷς συνδιέτριψεν, ἀεὶ τετηρηκότα· οὔτε μὴν ὁ Πολύκαρπος
τὸν Ἀνίκητον ἔπεισε τηρεῖν, λέγοντα τὴν συνήθειαν τῶν
πρὸ αὑτοῦ πρεσβυτέρων ὀφείλειν κατέχειν. καὶ τούτων οὔτως ἐχόντων,
ἐκοινὼνησαν ἑαυτοῖς· καὶ ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ παρεχώρησεν ὁ
Ἀνίκητος τὴν εὐχαριστίαν τῷ Πολυκάρπῳ, κατ᾽ ἐντροπὴν δηλονότι,
καὶ μετ᾽ εἰρήνης απ` ἀλλήλων ἀπηλλάγησαν, πάσης τῆς ἐκκλησίας
εἰρήνην ἐχόντων, καὶ τῶν τηρούντων καὶ τῶν μὴ τηρούντων.</note>. But Victor, who succeeded
Eleutherus in the see of Rome, viewed the matter in
a different light. He had no doubt felt the inconvenience
of this diversity of practice when Blastus
endeavoured to raise a schism in Rome on this very
point<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>. above.</note>. He therefore conceived the idea of using
his influence, as the bishop of the principal Church
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
in the world, to bring all Christians to one uniform
rule. For this purpose he wrote to certain<note place='foot'>We know that he wrote to Polycrates of Ephesus, and therefore
probably to the rest. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. V. xxiv. 3.&mdash;Ἐδυνάμην
δὲ τῶν ἐπισκόπων τῶν συμπαρόντων μνημονεῦσαι, οὓς
ὑμεῖς ἠξιώσατε μετακληθῆναι ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, καὶ μετεκαλεσάμην.</note> leading
bishops in Asia, requesting them to convene synods
of the neighbouring bishops, in order to come to an
agreement; which was done accordingly; and they
all, with the exception of the Churches above mentioned,
wrote circular letters to the whole catholic
Church, affirming that with them the apostolical
tradition was, not to break their paschal fast until
the Sunday. Eusebius particularly mentions<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. xxiii. 2. Σύνοδοι δὴ καὶ συγκροτήσεις ἐπισκόπων
ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν ἐγίνοντο. πάντες τε μιᾷ γνώμῃ δι᾽ ἐπιστολῶν ἐκκλησιαστικὸν
δόγμα τοῖς πανταχόσε διετυποῦντο, ὡς ἂν μηδ᾽ ἐν ἄλλῃ
ποτε τῆς Κυριακῆς ἡμέρᾳ τὸ τῆς ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀναστάσεως ἐπιτελοῖτο
τοῦ Κυρίου μυστήριον, καὶ ὄπως ἐν ταύτῃ μόνῃ τῶν κατὰ τὸ πάσχα
νηστειῶν φυλαττοίμεθα τας ἐπιλύσεις. Φέρεται δ᾽ εἰσέτι νῶν τῶν
κατὰ Παλαιστίνην τηνικάδε συγκεκροτημένων γραφὴ, ὧν προὐτέτακτο
Θεέφιλος τῆς ἐν Καισαρείᾳ παροικίας ἐπίσκοπος, καὶ Νάρκισσος
τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις· καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης δὲ ὁμοίως ἄλλη περὶ τοῦ
αὐτοῦ ζητήματος, ἐπίσκοπον Βίκτορα δηλοῦσα· τῶν τε κατὰ Πόντον
ἐπισκόπων, ὧν Πάλμας ὡς ἀρχαιότατος προὐτέτακτο· καὶ τῶν
κατὰ Γαλλίαν δὲ παροικιῶν, ἃς Εἰρηναῖος ἐπεσκόπει· ἔτι δὲ τῶν
κατὰ τὴν Ὀσροηνὴν καὶ τὰς ἐκεῖσε πόλεις· καὶ ἰδίως Βακχύλλου τῆς
Κορινθίων ἐκκλησίας ἐπισκόπου, καὶ πλείστων ὅσων ἄλλων, οἱ μίαν
καὶ τὴν αὐτην δόξαν τε καὶ κρίσιν ἐξενεγκόμενοι, τὴν αὐτὴν τέθεινται
ψῆφον.... 24. Τῶν δὲ ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀσίας ἐπισκόπων τὸ πάλαι
πρότερον αὐτοῖς παραδοθὲν διαφυλάττειν ἔθος χρῆναι διϊσχυριζομένων
ἡγεῖτο Πολυκράτης.</note> the
dioceses in Gaul under the superintendence of
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
Irenæus as having agreed upon such a synodical
letter, which he asserts was in existence in his time.
So far, Victor was successful; and, probably upon
the strength of the almost universal agreement of
the Churches, he appears to have held out some
threat to those of Asia Minor<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. xxiv. 2. Ἐγὼ οὖν, ἀδελφοὶ, ἑξήκοντα καὶ
πέντε ἔτη ἔχων ἐν Κυρίῳ, καὶ συμβεβληκὼς τοῖς ἀπὸ τῆς οἰκουμένης
ἀδελφοῖς, καὶ πᾶσαν ἁγίαν γραφὴν διεληλυθὼς, οὐ πτύρομαι ἐπὶ
τοῖς καταπλησσομένοις.</note>, unless they thought
proper to conform to the general practice. This,
however, they absolutely refused to do; maintaining
that their region abounded with relics of apostles and
martyrs, and that they preserved a tradition purer
than that of any other Church, and more consonant
with the Scriptures. This reply so incensed Victor,
that he forthwith issued letters, announcing that the
Asiatic brethren were cut off from the common
unity of Christians<note place='foot'>Euseb. V. xxiv. 3. Ἐπὶ τούτοις ὁ μὲν τῆς Ῥωμαίων προεστὼς
Βίκτωρ, ἀθρόως τῆς Ἀσίας πάσας ἅμα ταῖς ὁμόροις ἐκκλησίαις τὰς
παροικίας ἀποτέμνειν, ὡς ἑτεροδοξούσας, τῆς κοινῆς ἑνώσεως πειρᾶται·
καὶ στηλιτεύει γε διὰ γραμμάτων, ἀκοινωνήτους ἄρδην πάντας τοὺς
ἐκεῖσε ἀκακηρύττων ἀδελφούς.</note>. Here, however, he was not
followed by those who had previously agreed with
him; and Irenæus in particular, in the name of the
Christians in Gaul under his jurisdiction, wrote both
to Victor and to various other bishops<note place='foot'>Ibid. Ἀλλ᾽ οὺ πᾶσί γε τοῖς ἐπισκόποις ταῦτ᾽ ἠρέσκετο· ἀντιπαρακελεύονται
δῦτα αὐτῷ, τὰ τῆς εἰρήνης καὶ τῆς πρὸς τοὺς πλησίον
ἑνώσεως καὶ ἀγάπης φρονεῖν. Φέρονται δὲ καὶ αἱ τούτων
φωναὶ, πληκτικώτερον καθαπτομένων τοῦ Βίκτορος· ἐν οἷς καὶ ὁ
Εἰρηναῖος ἐκ προσώπου ὧν ἡγεῖτο κατὰ τὴν Γαλλίαν ἀδελφῶν
ἐπιστείλας, παρίσταται μὲν τῷ δεῖν ἐν μόνῃ τῇ τῆς κυριακῆς ἡμέρᾳ
τὸ τῆς τοῦ Κυρίου ἀναστάσεως ἐπιτελεῖσθαι μυστήριον· τῷ γε μὴν
Βίκτορι προσηκόντως, ὡς μὴ ἀποκόπτοι ὅλας ἐκκλησίας Θεοῦ
ἀρχαίου ἔθους παράδοσιν ἐπιτηρούσας, πλεῖστα ἕτερα παραινεῖ, καὶ
αὐτοῖς δὲ ῥήμασι τάδε ἐπιλέγων· Then follows the fragment Οὐ
γὰρ μόνον ... συνίστησι, extracted in the chapter <hi rend='italic'>on the
Forms and Ceremonies of the Church</hi>, and that quoted above,
p. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, note 4.&mdash;Ibid. xxiv. 6. Ὁ δ᾽ αύτὸς οὐ μόνον τῷ Βίκτορι,
ἀλλὰ και διαφόροις πλείστοις ἄρχουσιν ἐκκλησιῶν, τὰ κατάλληλα
δι᾽ ἐπιστολῶν περὶ τοῦ κεκινημένου ζητήματος ὡμίλει.</note>, strongly
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
pressing milder measures, and reminding the Roman
prelate of the example of Anicetus, one of his predecessors,
who paid Polycarp the highest honour,
even when assured that he would not conform to the
Western custom, and regarded his own as more
apostolical.
</p>

<p>
What the immediate result of these letters was
we are not informed by any contemporary writer.
Anatolius, indeed, (if the Latin version of his Treatise
on the Paschal Cycle, published by Bucherius, is
to be relied on,) asserts that Victor did not persist in
his excommunication<note place='foot'>Anatolius, apud Bucher. <hi rend='italic'>de Cycl. Vict.</hi> p. 444. ed. Antwerp,
1633.</note>; and we know subsequently<note place='foot'><p>Firmilian, bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, in a letter addressed
to Cyprian, preserved amongst those of Cyprian (<hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi>
75. ed. Potter. p. 220.), says, in reference to the diversity of
customs <q>circa celebrandos dies paschæ, et circa multa alia
divinæ rei sacramenta,</q> <q>Nec tamen propter hoc ab ecclesiæ
Catholicæ pace atque unitate aliquando discessum est.</q>
</p>
<p>
Athanasius, (<hi rend='italic'>de Synodis Arimini et Seleuciæ</hi>, § 5.), says, that
before the Council of Nice, οἱ μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς Συρίας καὶ Κιλικίας καὶ
Μεσοποταμίας ἐχώλευον περὶ τὴν ἑορτὴν, καὶ μετὰ τῶν Ἰουδαίων
ἐποιοῦντο πάσχα.
</p>
<p>
Chrysostom, in his <hi rend='italic'>Discourses against the Jews</hi>, in that one in
which he dissuades the Christians of Antioch from joining in
their observances, (tom. v. <hi rend='italic'>Hom.</hi> 55. p. 608. ed. Benedict.) reminds
them that the Church of Antioch once universally kept the
ante-paschal fast with the Jews, although they had, since the
Council of Nice, given up that practice: Καὶ ἡμεῖς οὕτως ἐνηστεύομεν
πρότερον, ἀλλ᾽ ὄμως προετιμήσαμεν τὴν συμφωνίαν τῆς τῶν
χρόνων παρατηρήσεως.</p></note>
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
that many Churches in Asia adhered to the Jewish
reckoning, and yet were not on that account regarded
with any aversion by their brethren; and it was not
until the council of Nice that their bishops there
assembled agreed to follow the general custom<note place='foot'>Theodoret. <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> I. 9. Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>de Vit. Const.</hi> 19.</note>,&mdash;to
which, however, many persons did not conform in
the time of Chrysostom.
</p>

<p>
The part which the bishop of Rome took in this
matter requires perhaps a more explicit notice. It
has, no doubt, been felt that Victor acted in a manner
which countenances the claims set up by the
popes of later days; but when we come to examine,
we shall find that whatever claims he advanced,
beyond what we should allow, were discountenanced
by the then catholic Church. He did, or attempted
to do, two things: first, to bring the whole Church
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
to one practice in the observance of the feast of
Easter; secondly, when he did not succeed with
some Churches, to excommunicate the dissentients.
</p>

<p>
The first was laudable; inasmuch as Christians
who travelled upon business, or removed their residence
from one part of Christendom to another, had
their feelings disturbed by finding their brethren
celebrating so important a festival on a different day
from that to which they were accustomed; and
some weak or factious minds were thus tempted to
make divisions in Churches to which they removed.
This had been particularly the case in the Church of
Rome, as being a place of general resort; and therefore
Victor, both on that account, and as bishop of
the principal Church in the world, very rightly
exerted himself to bring about uniformity. The
course he took was also a good one. He wrote to
the principal bishops in various countries, to request
them to call synods of the neighbouring bishops,
that thus he might ascertain the sense of the catholic
Church. Nothing could be more prudent or temperate;
nor was anything apparently better calculated
to persuade the minority, than to find one
consenting custom in so many Churches, in countries
separated so entirely from each other.
</p>

<p>
Now so far we have no claim set up inconsistent
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
with the station of influence and dignity which we
readily concede to have appertained to the Roman
bishops from very early times; and which, if not
most grossly abused, would never have been denied
to them. Some<note place='foot'>See Massuet, <hi rend='italic'>Diss. Præv.</hi> II. § 21.</note> have supposed that he, with his
letters, issued a threat of excommunicating those
Churches which refused to comply with the western
custom; but that is opposed to the sequel of the
history, from which we learn that such a threat
would have called forth remonstrances, of which in
this stage of the business we hear nothing.
</p>

<p>
Having received letters from every quarter except
from Asia Minor, stating that the traditional custom
was the same as that of Rome, he then, instead of
proceeding by persuasion, immediately conceived the
idea of <emph>compelling</emph> the dissentient Churches to comply
with his wishes, by threatening to cut them off
from communion if they declined. His threat had
no effect, and he proceeded to put it into execution,
nothing doubting that the Churches who had been
with him hitherto would still stand by him. And
this is the point at which we encounter something
like the modern papal claims; for he declared the
Churches of Asia Minor cut off, not only from <emph>his</emph>
communion, but from the common unity<note place='foot'>Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> V. xxiv. 3. quoted p. 47, note 9.</note>. Some
might argue that he must have had some foundation
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
for this claim; but till something of the kind can be
shown, we have no need to suppose any ground but
a strong desire of a rash and determined mind to
carry the point he had undertaken. Be the ground
what it may, <emph>the Catholic Church negatived his
claim</emph>; those who agreed with him in the desire of
bringing about unity of practice<note place='foot'>Jerome in <hi rend='italic'>Catal.</hi> quoted p. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, note 7.</note> would not unite
with him in excommunicating their brethren, but
rebuked him sharply<note place='foot'>Euseb. as quoted p. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, note 1.</note>; and Irenæus in particular
represented to him the difference between his spirit
and that of his predecessors. And so entirely abortive
was his attempt, that, as we have seen, about
sixty years after, Firmilian, in his letter to Cyprian<note place='foot'>See note 3, p. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>.</note>,
expressly asserted that the peace and unity of the
Catholic Church had never been broken by differences
about the observance of Easter or other religious
rites: and <emph>that</emph>, in alluding to the conduct of
Stephen, bishop of Rome, who had quarrelled with
the African bishops because their custom differed
from the Roman on the subject of rebaptizing those
who had been baptized by heretics; which would
necessarily have brought to mind any schism produced
by Victor, a previous bishop of Rome, if any
such had been produced.
</p>

<p>
Here, then, we have the most satisfactory evidence
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
that the Catholic Church, so near to the Apostles'
times, had decided against the power of the bishop
of Rome to cut off whom he might think fit from
the common unity; not that they knew nothing of
such a claim, but that <emph>it was practically made and
decided against</emph>.
</p>

<p>
We have now brought to a close all the circumstantial
part of the public life of Irenæus. Eusebius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> v. 26. Ἀλλὰ γὰρ πρὸς τοῖς ἀποδοθεῖσιν Εἰρηναίου
συγγράμμασι καὶ ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς, φέρεταί τις αὐτοῦ πρὸς Ἕλληνας
λόγος συντομώτατος καὶ ταμάλιστα ἀναγκαιότατος, Περὶ ἐπιστήμης
ἐπιγεγραμμένος· καὶ ἄλλος, ὃν ἀνατέθεικεν ἀδελφῷ Μαρκιανῷ
τοὔνομα, εἰς ἐπίδειξιν τοῦ ἀποστολικοῦ κηρύγματος· καὶ βιβλίον τι
Διαλέξεων διαφόρων, ἐν ᾧ τῆς πρὸς Ἐβραίους ἐπιστολῆς καὶ τῆς
λεγομένης σοφίας Σολωμῶντος μνημονεύει, ῥητά τινα ἐξ αὐτῶν
παραθέμενος.</note>
(who is followed by Jerome<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, note 7.</note>) has preserved to us
the names of others of his writings, which we have
now lost. Of these he mentions first, <hi rend='italic'>A Discourse to
the Gentiles</hi>, which he characterizes as <emph>very brief, and
very necessary</emph>, or <emph>cogent</emph>, and informs us that the title
of it was Περὶ Ἐπιστήμης, which Jerome, in his <hi rend='italic'>Catalogue</hi>,
translates <hi rend='italic'>De Disciplina</hi>, and supposes it to
be different from the <hi rend='italic'>Discourse</hi>. Another tract he
wrote, dedicated to one Marcianus, <hi rend='italic'>On the Preaching
of the Apostles</hi>. The last Eusebius mentions is
a volume of <emph>miscellaneous tracts</emph> or <emph>discussions</emph>, of
which the ninth fragment is probably a remnant.
</p>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Discourse concerning Easter</hi>, quoted by the author
of the <hi rend='italic'>Questions to the Orthodox</hi><note place='foot'>In the <hi rend='italic'>Answer</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Question</hi> 115. Ὁ μακάριος Εἰρηναῖος, ὁ
μάρτυρ καὶ ἐπίσκοπος Λουγδούνου, ἐν τῷ περὶ τοῦ Πάσχα λόγῳ
κ. τ. λ.</note>, formerly ascribed
to Justin Martyr, may have been his letter
to Victor on that subject. Maximus<note place='foot'>Tom. II. p. 152, ed. Combefis.</note> cites some
<hi rend='italic'>Discourses on Faith</hi>, addressed to Demetrius, a deacon
of Vienne, of which we have two fragments,
whether genuine or not, (numbered IV. and V.) in
the best editions of his Remains. Although forty-two
fragments, attributed to Irenæus, have been collected,
chiefly from Catenas, we have no clue for
appropriating the greater part of them to the writings
of which they formed a portion. One of them (the
last in the Benedictine edition) is said to pertain to
a discussion <hi rend='italic'>on the Eternity of Matter</hi>; but whether
belonging to a separate treatise, or a remnant of his
<hi rend='italic'>Discourse to the Gentiles</hi>, we have no means of judging.
</p>

<p>
We have no account of the death of Irenæus
upon which we can absolutely depend. Jerome in
one passage<note place='foot'>On Isaiah, lxiv. 4, 5. in vol. iv. p. 761 of his Works.</note> calls him a martyr, and so does the
author of the <hi rend='italic'>Questions and Answers</hi> above cited;
but no other early writer gives him that appellation;
neither have we any notice of his death by any
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
earlier author than Gregory of Tours<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Franc.</hi> x. 27. Veniente persecutione, talia ibidem diabolus
bella per tyrannum exercuit, et tanta ibi multitudo Christianorum
ob confessionem divini nominis est jugulata, ut per
plateas flumina currerent de sanguine Christiano; quorum nec
numerum nec nomina colligere potuimus: Dominus enim eos in
libro vitæ conscripsit. Beatum Irenæum, diversis in sua carnifex
præsentia pœnis affectum, Christo Domino per martyrium
dedicavit.</note>, who wrote
towards the end of the sixth century, and who
asserts that he died a martyr in a bloody persecution,
which the martyrologists Usuard and Ado<note place='foot'>Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires</hi>, tom. iii. part. 1. S. Irenée, Art. x.</note> assert
took place under Severus. In fact all the martyrologists,
both Latin and Greek, make him a martyr.
The tradition, therefore, appears a highly probable
one. But in whatever way he quitted this world,
we may rest assured that his name is written in the
book of life. His body is said<note place='foot'>Gregor. Turon. <hi rend='italic'>de Gloria Martyrum</hi>, I. 5. Hic in crypta
Basilicæ B. Joannis sub altari est sepultus.</note> to rest in the crypt
under the altar of the Church of St. John at Lyons.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter II. Testimony of Irenaeus to Certain Facts of Church History.'/>
<head>Chapter II. Testimony of Irenæus to Certain Facts of Church
History.</head>

<p>
There are two circumstances which must prevent us
from expecting that the writings of Irenæus should
add largely to our stores of historical knowledge;
one, that his remains are not very considerable in
extent, and the other, that they are chiefly occupied
in doctrinal controversy. What, however, he does
tell us, is important. He asserts that the Church in
his time was spread throughout the world<note place='foot'>I. x. 1. Ἡ μὲν γὰρ Ἐκκλησία, καίπερ καθ᾽ ὅλης τῆς οἰκουμένης
ἕως περάτων τῆς γῆς διεσπαρμένη.&mdash;2. Τοῦτο τὸ κήρυγμα
παρειληφυῖα, καὶ ταύτην τὴν πίστιν, ὡς προέφαμεν, ἡ Ἐκκλησία,
καίπερ ἐν ὅλω τῷ κόσμῳ διεσπαρμένη, ἐπιμελῶς φυλάσσει, ὡς ἕνα
οἶκον οἰκοῦσα· καὶ ὀμοίως πιστεύει τούτοις, ὡς μίαν ψυχὴν καὶ τὴν
αὐτὴν ἔχουσα καρδίαν· καὶ συμφώνως ταῦτα κηρύσσει, καὶ διδάσκει,
καὶ παραδίδωσιν, ὡς ἓν στόμα κεκτημένη.</note>; and particularly
specifies the Churches in Germany, Iberia,
(i. e. Spain), amongst the Celts (i. e. in Gaul), in the
East, in Egypt, in Lybia, and in the centre of the
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
world, by which he no doubt means Palestine<note place='foot'>I. x. 2. Καὶ γὰρ αἱ κατὰ τὸν κόσμον διάλεκτοι ἀνόμοιαι, ἀλλ᾽
ἡ δύναμις τῆς παραδόσεως μία καὶ ἡ αὐτή· καὶ οὔτε αἱ ἐν Γερμανίαις
ἰδρυμέναι Ἐκκλησίαι ἄλλως πεπιστεύκασιν, ἢ ἄλλως παραδιδόασιν,
οὔτε ἐν ταῖς Ἰβηρίαις, οὔτε ἐν Κελτοῖς, οὔτε κατὰ τὰς ἀνατολὰς,
οὔτε ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ, οὔτε ἐν Λιβύῃ, οὔτε αἱ κατὰ μέσα τοῦ κόσμου
ἰδρυμέναι.</note>. He
likewise incidentally shows that the Gospel had been
preached in Ethiopia<note place='foot'>III. xii. 8. Ὡς αὐτὸς ὁ εὐνοῦχος πεισθεὶς, καὶ παραυτίκα ἀξιῶν
Βαπτισθῆναι, ἔλεγε· Πιστεύω τὸν Υἱὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ εἶναι Ἰησοῦν Χριστόν.
ὃς καὶ ἐπέμφθη εἰς τὰ κλίματα Αἰθιοπίας, κηρύξων τοῦτο,
ὅπερ ἐπίστευσε, Θεὸν μὲν ἕνα, τὸν διὰ τῶν προφητῶν κεκηρυγμένον.&mdash;IV.
xxiii. 2. Nihil enim aliud deerat ei, qui a Prophetis fuerat
præcatechizatus: non Deum Patrem, non conversationis dispositionem,
sed solum adventum ignorabat Filii Dei; quem cum
breviter cognovisset, agebat iter gaudens, præco futurus in Æthiopia
Christi adventus.</note>. He furnishes no evidence
concerning the first missionaries, except in the case
of Ethiopia, to which he informs us the eunuch baptized
by Philip was sent; but he declares explicitly
that all the Churches through the world, although
differing in usage<note place='foot'>Frag. iii. p. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, note 4.</note>, had but one faith<note place='foot'>I. x. 2, 3. Τῆς οὔσης Ἐκκλησίας πάσης μίαν καὶ τὴν αὐτὴν
πίστιν ἐχούσης εἰς πάντα τὸν κόσμον, καθὼς προέφαμεν, κ. τ. λ.</note>, which was
delivered to them at baptism<note place='foot'>I. ix. 4. Οὕτω δὲ καὶ ὁ τὸν κανόνα τῆς ἀληθείας ἀκλινῆ ἐν
ἑαυτῷ κατέχων, ὃν διὰ τοῦ Βαπτίσματος εἴληφε, κ. τ. λ.</note>.
</p>

<p>
He speaks of the Churches in general as having
been settled by the Apostles<note place='foot'>III. iii. 1. Traditionem itaque Apostolorum in toto mundo
manifestatam, in omni Ecclesia adest respicere omnibus qui vera
velint videre: et habemus annumerare eos qui ab Apostolis instituti
sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis, et successores eorum usque ad
nos, qui nihil tale docuerunt, neque cognoverunt, quale ab his
deliratur. Etenim si recondita mysteria scissent Apostoli, quæ
seorsim et latenter ab reliquis perfectos docebant, his vel maxime
traderent ea quibus etiam ipsas Ecclesias committebant. Valde
enim perfectos et irreprehensibiles in omnibus eos volebant esse,
quos et successores relinquebant, suum ipsorum locum magisterii
tradentes; quibus emendate agentibus fieret magna utilitas, lapsis
autem summa calamitas.</note>, and particularly specifies
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
that the Church of Rome was founded by S.
Peter and S. Paul, who appointed its first bishop
Linus<note place='foot'>III. iii. 2. Sed quoniam valde longum est in hoc tali volumine
omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare successiones; maximæ, et antiquissimæ,
et omnibus cognitæ, a gloriosissimis duobus Apostolis
Petro et Paulo Romæ fundatæ et constitutæ Ecclesiæ, eam quam
habet ab Apostolis Traditionem, et annuntiatam hominibus fidem,
per successiones Episcoporum pervenientem usque ad nos indicantes,
confundimus omnes eos, qui quoquo modo, vel per sibi placentia,
vel vanam gloriam, vel per cæcitatem et malam sententiam,
præterquam oportet colligunt.</note>; that Polycarp was made bishop of Smyrna
by Apostles<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, note 3.</note>, and that the succession from him had
been kept up to the time of his writing<note place='foot'>III. iii. 4. Μαρτυροῦσιν τούτοις αἱ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐκκλησίαι
πᾶσαι, καὶ οἱ μέχρι νῦν διαδεδεγμένοι τὸν Πολύκαρπον, πολλῷ
ἀξιοπιστότερον καὶ βεβαιότερον ἀληθείας μάρτυρα ὄντα Οὐαλεντίνου
καὶ Μαρκίωνος, καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν κακογνωμόνων.</note>; and that
S. John watched over the Church of Ephesus down
to the time of Trajan<note place='foot'>III. iii. 4. Ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡ ἐν Ἐφέσῳ ἐκκλησία ὑπὸ Παύλου μὲν
τεθεμελιωμένη, Ἰωάννου δὲ παραμείναντος αὐτοῖς μέχρι τῶν Τραϊανοῦ
χρόνων, μάρτυς ἀληθής ἐστι τῆς Ἀποστόλων παραδόσεως.</note>. He informs us that the successors
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
of the first bishops might be reckoned up in
many Churches down to his own time<note place='foot'>III. iii. 1. supra.</note>, particularly
specifies the Churches of Rome and Smyrna<note place='foot'>III. iii. 1. 4.</note>, and
gives a catalogue of the bishops of Rome as follows:&mdash;Linus,
mentioned by S. Paul in his epistles to
Timothy<note place='foot'>2 Tim. iv. 21.</note>; Anencletus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Anencletus</hi> is called <hi rend='italic'>Anacletus</hi> by the ancient translator of
Irenæus, and <hi rend='italic'>Cletus</hi> by Epiphanius (<hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> I. § 27.) and the
Canon of the Mass. Later writers than Epiphanius make him
two persons, but their accounts are contradictory. See Pearson's
Posthumous Works, <hi rend='italic'>Dissert. de Serie et Successione Episcoporum
Romanorum</hi>, II. 1; and Nourry, <hi rend='italic'>Apparatus ad Biblioth. Patrum</hi>,
VI. v. 5.</note>; Clement<note place='foot'>Clement is mentioned by Tertullian (<hi rend='italic'>De Præscrip. Hær.</hi> 32.)
as <emph>ordained by Peter</emph>. It is probable that this might have taken
place in the slight interval which elapsed between the death of
St. Paul and that of St. Peter, both of which took place in the
same persecution.</note>, who had seen
and conferred with the Apostles; Evarestus; Alexander;
Xystus, or Sixtus; Telesphorus, who suffered
martyrdom; Hyginus; Pius; Anicetus; Soter;
Eleutherius<note place='foot'>III. iii. 3. Θεμελιώσαντες οὖν καὶ οἰκοδομήσαντες οἱ μακάριοι
ἀπόστολοι τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, Λίνῳ τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς λειτουργίαν ἐνεχείρισαν.
τούτου τοῦ Λίνου Παῦλος ἐν ταῖς πρὸς Τιμόθεον ἐπιστολαῖς
μέμνηται· διαδέχεται δὲ αὐτὸν Ἀνέγκλητος. μετὰ τοῦτον καὶ τρίτῳ
τόπῳ ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν κληροῦται Κλήμης, ὁ καὶ
ἑωρακὼς τοὺς μακαρίους ἀποστόλους, καὶ συμβεβληκὼς αὐτοῖς, καὶ
ἔτι ἔναυλον τὸ κήρυγμα τῶν ἀποστόλων, καὶ τὴν παράδοσιν πρὸ
ὀφθαλμῶν ἔχων, οὐ μόνος· ἔτι γὰρ πολλοὶ ὑπελείποντο τότε ὑπὸ τῶν
ἀποστόλων δεδιδαγμένοι.&mdash;Τὸν δὲ Κλήμεντα τοῦτον διαδέχεται
Εὐάρεστος· καὶ τὸν Εὐάρεστον Ἀλέξανδρος· εἶθ᾽ οὕτως ἔκτος ἀπὸ
τῶν ἀποστόλων καθίσταται Ξύστος· μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον Τελεσφόρος,
ὃς καὶ ἐνδόξως ἐμαρτύρησεν· ἔπειτα Ὕγῖνος, εἶτα Πῖος· μεθ᾽ ὃν
Ἀνίκητος. διαδεξαμένου τὸν Ἀνίκητον Σωτῆρος, νῦν δωδεκάτῳ τόπῳ
τὸν τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων κετέχει κλῆρον Ἐλεύθερος.
τῇ αὐτῇ τάξει, καὶ τῇ αὐτῇ διδαχῇ ἤτε ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ
παράδοσις, καὶ τὸ τῆς ἀληθείας κήρυγμα κατήντηκεν εἰς ἡμᾶς.</note>: and we have a fragment of a letter of
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
his own to Victor, the successor of Eleutherius<note place='foot'>Fragm. iii. See p. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, note 4.</note>.
He has preserved an anecdote of St. John, viz. that
upon one occasion entering a bath, and seeing Cerinthus
there, he withdrew precipitately, saying that he
was afraid lest the building should fall, because Cerinthus,
the enemy of the truth, was in it<note place='foot'>III. iii. 4. Καὶ εἴσιν οἱ ἀκηκοότες αὐτοῦ, ὅτι Ἰωάννης, ὁ τοῦ
Κυρίου μαθητὴς, ἐν τῇ Ἐφέσῳ πορευθεὶς λούσασθαι, καὶ ἰδὼν ἔσω
Κήρινθον, ἐξήλατο τοῦ βαλανείου μὴ λουσάμενος, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπειπών·
Φύγωμεν, μὴ καὶ τὸ βαλανεῖον συμπέσῃ, ἔνδον ὄντος Κηρίνθου, τοῦ
τῆς ἀληθείας ἐχθροῦ.</note>. This
anecdote is indeed at variance with the notion of
Christian charity current at the present day, but it
rests upon the testimony of Polycarp, who knew St.
John well; and it is strictly in accordance with the
spirit of the directions he himself gave to <q>the elect
lady,</q> not to receive heretical teachers into her
house, or bid them God speed<note place='foot'>3 John 10.</note>.
</p>

<p>
We are likewise indebted to Irenæus for some
particulars respecting Polycarp. He states that he
had been favoured with familiar intercourse with St.
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
John and the rest who had seen Jesus, and had heard
from them particulars respecting him and his miracles
and teaching<note place='foot'>Frag. ii. See p. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, note 2.</note>. He mentions his having spent
some time in Rome in the days of Anicetus<note place='foot'>III. iii. 4. Ὃς καὶ ἐπὶ Ἀνικήτου ἐπιδημήσας τῇ Ῥώμῃ, πολλοὺς
ἀπὸ τῶν προειρημένων αἱρετικῶν ἐπέστρεψεν εἰς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ
Θεοῦ, μίαν καὶ μόνην ταύτην ἀλήθειαν κηρύξας ὑπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων
παρειληφέναι, τὴν ὑπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας παραδεδομένην.</note>. He
does not, indeed, state the cause of his visit; but
Eusebius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> IV. 14.</note> and Jerome<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Viris Illustribus</hi>, 27.</note> distinctly say that it was on
account of the Paschal controversy. This subject,
amongst others, our author states to have been discussed
between them, and that Polycarp rested his
adherence to the Jewish practice upon his having
always kept Easter in that way with St. John and
the other Apostles, and consequently declined to
change it; whereupon, to show that this inflexibility
had produced no breach of amity, Anicetus thought
proper to request Polycarp to officiate for him, and
to take his place at the holy communion<note place='foot'>Frag. iii. See p. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, note 4.</note>. During
his stay there<note place='foot'>III. iii. 4. Καὶ αὐτὸς δε ὁ Πολύκαρπος Μαρκίωνί ποτε εἰς
ὄψιν αὐτῷ ἐλθόντι, καὶ φήσαντι, Ἐπιγίνώσκεις ἡμᾶς; ἀπεκρίθη·
Ἐπιγινώσκω τὸν πρωτότοκον τοῦ Σατανᾶ. Τοσαύτην οἱ ἀπόστολοι,
καὶ οἱ μαθηταὶ αὐτῶν ἔσχον εὐλάβειαν, πρὸς τὸ μηδὲ μέχρι
λόγου κοινωνεῖν τινὶ τῶν παραχαρασσόντων τὴν ἀλήθειαν, ὡς καὶ
Παῦλος ἔφησεν· Ἁἰρετικὸν ἄνθρωπον μετὰ μίαν καὶ δευτέραν νουθεσίαν
παραιτοῦ, εἰδὼς ὅτι ἐξέστραπται ὁ τοιοῦτος, καὶ ἁμαρτάνει,
ὢν αὐτοκατάκριτος.&mdash;That it was <emph>at Rome</emph> rests upon the testimony
of Jerome, <hi rend='italic'>De Vir. Ill.</hi> 17.</note> he met Marcion, who inquired if he
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
recognised him. His reply was, <q>I recognise the
first-born of Satan.</q> This severity (or bigotry, as it
would now be called) does not appear to have operated
in his disfavour; for he was instrumental in
recovering to the Church many who had been led
away by the Gnostic delusions<note place='foot'>III. iii. 4.</note>. Irenæus likewise
mentions Polycarp's epistle to the Philippians<note place='foot'>III. iii. 4. Ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἐπιστολὴ Πολυκάρπου πρὸς Φιλιππησίους
γεγραμμένη ἱκανωτάτη, ἐξ ἧς καὶ τὸν χαρακτῆρα τῆς πίστεως
αὐτοῦ, καὶ τὸ κήρυγμα τῆς ἀληθείας, οἱ Βουλόμενοι, καὶ φροντίζοντες
τῆς ἐαυτῶν σωτηρίας, δύνανται μαθεῖν.</note>, and
other epistles to other Churches and individuals<note place='foot'>Frag. ii. Καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν δὲ αὐτοῦ, ὧν ἐπέστειλεν ἤτοι
ταῖς γειτνιώσαις ἐκκληίαις, ἐπιστηρίζων αὐτὰς, ἢ τῶν ἀδελφῶν
τισι, νουθετῶν αὐτοὺς, καὶ προτρεπόμενος, δύναται φανερωθῆναι.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Respecting Clement, whom Eusebius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> III. 15.</note> identifies
with the companion of S. Paul<note place='foot'>Phil. iv. 3.</note>, he states that he
wrote a very effectual letter to the Corinthians, to
allay the dissensions which had arisen amongst them,
and to restore the integrity of their faith<note place='foot'>III. iii. 3. Ἐπὶ τούτου οὖν τοῦ Κλήμεντος στάσεως οὐκ ὀλίγης
τοῖς ἐν Κορίνθω γενομένης ἀδελφοῖς, ἐπέστειλεν ἡ ἐν Ρώμη ἐκκλησία
ἱκανωτάτην γραφὴν τοῖς Κορινθίοις, εἰς εἰρήνην συμβιβάζουσα
αὐτοὺς, καὶ ἀνανεοῦσα τὴν πίστιν αὐτῶν, καὶ ἣν νεωστὶ ἀπὸ τῶν
ἀποστόλων παράδοσιν εἰλήφει.</note>. This is,
of course, the first epistle of S. Clement, to the genuineness
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
of which his mention of it is a powerful testimony.
</p>

<p>
He speaks of the Church of Rome not only as
having been founded and settled under its first bishop
by St. Peter and St. Paul, but as being one of the
greatest and most ancient, well known to all men<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, note 9.</note>,
preserving the true doctrine by the resort of persons
from all quarters, and possessing from this circumstance
a more powerful pre-eminence; and states
that all Churches must on that account resort to it<note place='foot'>III. iii. 2. Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitatem
necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, eos
qui sunt undique fideles, in qua semper ab his, qui sunt undique,
conservata est ea quæ est ab Apostolis Traditio.</note>.
It is well known that this is a passage upon which
Romanists very much rely, as establishing the claim
of their Church to be the mistress of controversies
to all Christendom; and I have chosen to give it
the utmost force of which it is fairly capable, in order
to avoid the charge of slurring it over, and in order
to show that even thus it states nothing inconsistent
with the doctrine of the Church of England respecting
the present Church of Rome. I will therefore
give a translation of the passage, which appears below,
and make some remarks upon that translation:&mdash;<q>For
every Church (that is, the faithful who are
on all sides,) must on account of its more powerful
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
pre-eminence resort to this Church, in which the
apostolical tradition is preserved by those who are
on all sides.</q>
</p>

<p>
There are several words in this passage which
must influence the sense of it. The first I shall
notice is the word <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentiorem</foreign>, the more especially
as there is a various reading upon it. One MS. (the
Clermont) of considerable value, reads <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potiorem</foreign>; but
Massuet, who examined it, says that it <emph>had</emph> been
written <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pontiorem</foreign> (but altered to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potiorem</foreign>,) which is
almost certainly a contraction for the common reading.
We must therefore, I conclude, sit down with
the common reading; although Massuet, in the Benedictine
edition, and J. J. Griesbach, in some remarks
upon this passage<note place='foot'>Prog. <hi rend='italic'>de potentiore Eccl. Rom. principalitate</hi>. Jenæ, 1780.
4to.</note>, prefer the other. But what
Greek word <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentiorem</foreign> represents must be matter
of conjecture; and no one who is acquainted with
the manner in which the translator has rendered
Greek words will be inclined to lay much stress
upon it. It may have been put for ἱκανωτέραν, or
κρείττονα; or, in short, the comparative of any adjective
which <emph>admits</emph> of being rendered <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potens</foreign>. We
then come to the word <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>principalitatem</foreign>. This we
know that the ancient translator of Irenæus uses to
signify ἀρχή<note place='foot'>II. xxx. 9. In translating Eph. i. 21.</note>. Putting these two together, Griesbach
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
has rendered κρείττονα ἀρχὴν, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potiorem initium</foreign>, and
thus got rid of the idea of <emph>authority</emph> altogether. But
there is no need of this. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Principalis</foreign> is used by the
translator as the rendering of ἡγεμονικός<note place='foot'>III. xi. 8.</note>; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>principaliter</foreign>,
of προηγουμένως<note place='foot'>I. ix. 3.</note>, and προηγητίκως<note place='foot'>V. xxvii. 2.</note>; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>principalitatem
habeo</foreign>, of πρωτεύω<note place='foot'>IV. xxxviii. 3.</note>. We know that all the
apostolical sees had a kind of <emph>principality</emph> or <emph>pre-eminence</emph>
above the surrounding Churches; a <hi rend='italic'>more
powerful</hi> pre-eminence than other Churches equally
ancient with themselves. Nay, we know that the
Church of Rome had at that time, in point of fact,
a more powerful pre-eminence than any other
Church.
</p>

<p>
The next word to be considered is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>convenire</foreign>,
which may be rendered either <emph>resort</emph> or <emph>agree</emph>;
and I confess I should have been disposed, with
Massuet, to render it <emph>agree</emph>, were it not for a
perfectly parallel passage in the 32d <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> of
Gregory of Nazianzum, delivered at the first council
of Constantinople. Speaking of Constantinople, he
says, εἰς ἣν τὰ πανταχόθεν ἄκρα συντρέχει, καὶ ὅθεν ἄρχεται
ὡς ἐμπορίου κοινοῦ τῆς πίστεως. Here Constantinople
is spoken of <emph>then</emph> under the very same terms
as Rome by Irenæus, as <emph>the common repository of the
faith</emph>: other parts of the Christian world are said to
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
be <emph>governed</emph> (ἄρχεται) by it; and distant Churches
are said to <emph>resort from all quarters</emph>: συντρέχει πανταχόθεν.
Are not these words an exact parallel to the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>convenire</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>undique</foreign> of the translator of Irenæus?
I therefore feel bound to give <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>convenire</foreign> the sense of
<emph>resort</emph>. The next word to be noticed is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>undique</foreign>, the
<emph>application</emph> of which is disputed; some, as Barrow<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Pope's Supremacy</hi>, V. ix. p. 234, edit. 1680. <q>The faithful
who are all about.</q></note>
and Faber<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Difficulties of Romanism</hi>, B. I. chap. iii. sect. iv. 2. (4.) <q>To
this Church, on account of the more potent principality, it is necessary
that every Church should resort; that is to say, those
faithful individuals who are on every side of it. In which Church,
by those who are on every side of it, the tradition, which is from
the Apostles, has always been preserved.</q></note>, applying it only to the immediate neighbourhood
of Rome, i. e. Italy and the adjacent parts
of Gaul; others, and of course the Romanists, to
the whole Christian Church. According to the former
plan, the clause <q>hoc est ... fideles</q> is a limitation
of the expression <q>omnem ecclesiam,</q> confining
it to the Churches immediately surrounding
Rome; and consequently the pre-eminence of the
Church of Rome would be equally narrowed by this
interpretation of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>undique</foreign>. I am far from contending
that this interpretation is not correct; and the very
fact of the passage admitting it, without any force
whatever, shows how little the papal cause can be
made to rest upon it. But as Gregory, in the parallel
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
passage I have quoted, uses the term πανταχόθεν,
I am disposed to take <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>undique</foreign> as its representative;
the more especially as we have seen that, whatever
influence it gives to Rome, the selfsame influence
had Constantinople in an after age.
</p>

<p>
There are one or two more words still to be mentioned.
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Necesse est</foreign> is one of them. It may imply
that it is the <emph>duty</emph> of every Church to resort to
Rome; but its more natural and usual meaning is,
that, <emph>as a matter of course</emph>, Christians from all parts,
and not strictly the Churches themselves, were led
to resort thither by the superior eminence of that
Church.
</p>

<p>
I have hitherto taken this passage as though it
<emph>must</emph> be applied definitely to the Church of Rome.
But this is by no means necessary; for it may be a
general observation applicable to all the most eminent
Churches, as may be seen by the following
translation and arrangement of it:&mdash;<q>For every
Church, (that is, the faithful all around,) must necessarily
resort to that Church in which the apostolical
tradition has been preserved by those on all sides
of it, on account of its more powerful pre-eminence;</q>
that is, Christians must have recourse each to the
most ancient and most eminent Church in his neighbourhood.
And this agrees with a passage of
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
Tertullian<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Præscr. Hær.</hi> 36.</note>, in which he refers southern Greeks to
Corinth, northern to Philippi and Thessalonica, Asiatics
to Ephesus, Italians and Africans to Rome.
The only objection which occurs to me lies in the
word <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>hanc</foreign>, which, if the passage is to be taken in
this application, must be translated <emph>that</emph>; but as it
was in all probability the representative of ταύτην,
this word can scarcely present any difficulty.
</p>

<p>
I will close this whole discussion with two remarks;
first, that unless we could recover the Greek
text of this passage, it is plainly impossible to <emph>ascertain</emph>
its true sense; and secondly, that the strongest
sense we can attach to it, consistently with history,
is, that Christians of that period from all parts
of Christendom must, if they wish to ascertain traditions,
have recourse to the Church of Rome, because,
as the first Church in Christendom, the common
traditions were preserved there by the resort of
Christians from all quarters. This twofold reason
for resorting thither has long ceased to exist, and
consequently this passage of Irenæus can afford no
support to the claims of modern Rome, until it can
be proved that those portions of the Christian world
which are not in communion with her are no part
of the Catholic Church.
</p>

<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>

<p>
There is another subject which has caused much
discussion, which is adverted to by Irenæus, viz. the
miraculous powers of the Church. He declares that
in his time powers of this kind were possessed by
Christians, such as raising the dead<note place='foot'>II. xxxi. 2. Καὶ ἐν τῇ ἀδελφότητι πολλάκις διὰ τὸ ἀναγκαῖον,
τῆς κατὰ τόπον ἐκκλησίας πάσης αἰτησαμένης μετὰ νηστείας πολλῆς
καὶ λιτανείας, ἐπέστρεψε τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ τετελευτηκότος, καὶ
ἐχαρίσθη ὁ ἄνθρωπος ταῖς εὐχαῖς τῶν ἁγίων.&mdash;xxxii. 4. Quapropter
et in illius nomine, qui vere illius sunt discipuli ab ipso accipientes
gratiam, perficiunt ad beneficia reliquorum hominum,
quemadmodum unusquisque accepit donum ab eo. Alii enim
dæmones excludunt firmissime et vere, ut etiam sæpissime credant
ipsi, qui emundati sunt a nequissimis spiritibus, et sint in
Ecclesia. Alii autem et præscientiam habent futurorum, et visiones,
et dictiones propheticas. Alii autem laborantes aliqua infirmitate
per manus impositionem curant, et sanos restituunt.
Jam etiam, quemadmodum diximus, et mortui resurrexerunt, et
perseveraverunt nobiscum annis multis. Et quid autem? Non
est numerum dicere gratiarum, quas per universum mundum
Ecclesia a Deo accipiens, in nomine Christi Jesu, crucifixi sub
Pontio Pilato, per singulos dies in opitulationem gentium perficit,
neque seducens aliquem, nec pecuniam ei auferens. Quemadmodum
enim gratis accepit a Deo, gratis et ministrat. 5. &mdash;&mdash;munde
et pure et manifeste orationes dirigens ad Dominum, qui
omnia fecit, et nomen Domini nostri Jesu Christi invocans,
virtutes ad utilitates hominum, sed non ad seductionem, perficit.</note>, and casting out
devils, and healing the sick; that they likewise had
the gift of prophecy<note place='foot'>II. xxxii. 4, supra. V. vi. 1. Καθὼς καὶ πολλῶν ἀκούομεν ἀδελφῶν
ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, προφητικὰ χαρίσματα ἐχόντων, καὶ παντοδαπαῖς
λαλούντων διὰ τοῦ Πνεύματος γλώσσαις, καὶ τὰ κρύφια τῶν ἀνθρώπων
εἰς φανερὸν ἀγόντων ἐπὶ τῷ συμφέροντι, καὶ τὰ μυστήρια τοῦ
Θεοῦ ἐκδιηγουμένων.</note>, and spoke with tongues, and
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
revealed secret things of men and mysteries of God<note place='foot'>V. vi. 1.</note>.
It is well known that Gibbon and Middleton have
thrown doubt upon the miraculous powers of the
primitive Church; and one of their chief arguments
is that the early writers, such as Irenæus, content
themselves with general statements, but bring no
specific instance. The subject has been very fully
entered into by the present highly learned and amiable
bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Kaye, in his work on
Tertullian<note place='foot'>Pp. 98-102.</note>; and in the general I am disposed to
acquiesce in the theory adopted by the bishop, that
those powers were conferred only by apostolical
hands, and that of course they would continue till
all that generation was extinct who were contemporary
with St. John, the last of the Apostles. That
would admit of Irenæus having known instances;
and not having any idea that the power was to be
extinct, he would think that it still remained, even
if he had not known any <emph>recent</emph> instances. It is
necessary to remark, however, that he speaks of the
gifts of tongues and the revealing of secrets and
mysteries, not as a thing coming under his own
knowledge, but heard of from others; and it does
not appear that he intends to say that they continued
to his own time. And I will venture to observe
that it appears rather unfair to Irenæus to set
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
aside his testimony by saying that he brings no specific
instance of those things which he speaks of as
still done. He might feel that the thing was so
notorious, that those who were not convinced by the
notoriety of such occurrences would cavil at any
particular case he might select; and his mentioning
that some of those who had been delivered from evil
spirits had become converts, that some of those who
had been raised from the dead, being poor, had been
assisted with money<note place='foot'>II. xxxi. 3. &mdash;&mdash;in Ecclesia autem miseratio, et misericordia,
et firmitas, et veritas ad opitulationem hominum, non solum sine
mercede et gratis perficiatur; sed et nobis ipsis quæ sunt nostra
erogantibus pro salute hominum, et ea quibus hi, qui curantur,
indigent, sæpissime non habentes, a nobis accipiunt.</note>, and that some had lived many
years after<note place='foot'>II. xxxii. 4. See p. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, note 8.</note>, surely indicates that he was speaking
from a knowledge of individual cases. One should
indeed have expected that every one who owed his
deliverance from Satanic possession to the miraculous
power possessed by Christians would have embraced
the faith of those who exercised it; and the circumstance
that Irenæus affirms this of <emph>some</emph> only gives
a greater air of probability to his whole statement.
Besides this, we must distinguish between the cases
of persons healed by the direct agency of an individual,
and those in which it pleased God to hear
the joint prayers of several; for it is observable that
our author attributes the raising of the dead only to
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
the united prayers and fasting of a whole Church,
and confines it to cases of great urgency<note place='foot'>II. xxxi. 2. διὰ τὸ ἀναγκαῖον. See p. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, note 8.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The testimony which Irenæus bears to the relation
between the Church and the empire is but slight.
He mentions a Christian as having been in his own
youth high in the imperial court, at the same time
that he was a follower or admirer of Polycarp<note place='foot'>Frag. ii. See p. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>. note 2.</note>; he
speaks of Christians in the imperial palace deriving
an income from the heathen, and able to assist their
poorer brethren<note place='foot'>IV. xxx. 1. Quid autem et hi, qui in Regali aula sunt, fideles,
nonne ex eis, quæ Cæsaris sunt, habent utensilia, et his qui
non habent, unusquisque eorum secundum virtutem præstat.</note>; and he acknowledges the general
advantages which Christians derived from the supremacy
of the Romans, in common with their other
subjects, in the prevalence of peace and the freedom
from individual outrage<note place='foot'>IV. xxx. 3. Sed et mundus pacem habet per eos, et nos sine
timore in viis ambulamus et navigamus quocumque voluerimus.</note>. But he mentions very
distinctly the persecutions at another time Christians
suffered (particularly alluding to those which took
place at Lyons), and notices that slaves were compelled
to inform against their masters; and that in
this way the calumny that Christians fed upon human
flesh arose, from a misunderstanding of the nature of
the holy Eucharist<note place='foot'>Frag. xiii. Χριστιανῶν γὰρ κατηχουμένων δούλους Ἕλληνες
συλλαβόντες, εἶτα μαθεῖν τι παρὰ τούτων δῆθεν ἀπόρῥητον περὶ
Χριστιανῶν ἀναγκάζοντες, οἱ δοῦλοι οὗτοι, μὴ ἔχοντες πῶς τὸ τοῖς
ἀναγκάζουσι καθ᾽ ἡδονὴν ἐρεῖν, παρ᾽ ὅσον ἤκουον τῶν δεσποτῶν, τὴν
θείαν μετάληψιν αἷμα καὶ σῶμα εἶναι Χριστοῦ, αὐτοὶ νομίσαντες
τῷ ὄντι αἷμα καὶ σάρκα εἶναι, τοῦτο ἐξεῖπον τοῖς ἐκζητοῦσι. οἱ δὲ
λαβόντες ὡς αὐτόχρημα τοῦτο τελεῖσθαι Χριστιανοῖς, κ.τ.λ.</note>; the slaves having heard their
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
masters speak of feeding on the body and blood of
Christ, and taking it in a literal sense.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. On The Nature, Office, Powers, and Privileges
Of The Church.</head>

<p>
The proper aspect to view the Church in is a matter
of so much practical importance at all times, that
it can never be uninteresting to know the light in
which it was regarded in the subapostolical age, of
which Irenæus is a very unobjectionable evidence.
</p>

<p>
We shall find then that this writer considered the
Church to be an ascertainable society, planted first
at Jerusalem<note place='foot'>III. xii. 5. After quoting Acts iv. 24, &amp;c. he proceeds thus:&mdash;Αὑται
φωναὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας, ἐξ ἧς πᾶσα ἔσχηκεν ἐκκλησία τὴν
ἀρχήν· αὗται φωναὶ τῆς Μητροπόλεως τῶν τῆς καινῆς διαθήκης
πολιτῶν.</note>, and thence spread to the limits of the
habitable globe<note place='foot'>I. x. 1. See p. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, note.</note>; planted by the Apostles, and kept
up by and in the elders or bishops their successors<note place='foot'>III. iii. 1. See p. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, note 7.</note>.
It is, however, divided into separate Churches, which
are to regard that of Jerusalem as their mother
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
Church<note place='foot'>III. xii. 5. supra.</note>. The whole Church, moreover, is to its
individual members as a mother to her children<note place='foot'>III. xxiv. 1. Prædicationem vero Ecclesiæ undique constantem,
et æqualiter perseverantem, et testimonium habentem a
Prophetis et ab Apostolis, et ab omnibus discipulis, quemadmodum
ostendimus per initia, et medietates, et finem, et per universam
Dei dispositionem, et eam quæ secundum salutem hominis
est solitam operationem, quæ est in fide nostra; quam perceptam
ab Ecclesia custodimus, et quæ semper a Spiritu Dei, quasi in
vase bono eximium quoddam depositum juvenescens, et juvenescere
faciens ipsum vas in quo est. Hoc enim Ecclesiæ creditum
est Dei munus, quemadmodum ad inspirationem plasmationi,
ad hoc ut omnia membra percipientia vivificentur: et in eo disposita
est communicatio <hi rend='smallcaps'>Christi</hi>, id est, Spiritus sanctus, arrha
incorruptelæ, et confirmatio fidei nostræ, et scala ascensionis ad
Deum. <q>In Ecclesia enim,</q> inquit, <q>posuit Deus Apostolos,
Prophetas, doctores,</q> et universam reliquam operationem Spiritus:
cujus non sunt participes omnes, qui non currunt ad Ecclesiam,
sed semetipsos fraudant a vita, per sententiam malam, et
operationem pessimam. Ubi enim Ecclesia, ibi et Spiritus Dei;
et ubi Spiritus Dei, illic Ecclesia, et omnis gratia: Spiritus autem
veritas. Quapropter qui non participant eum, neque a mammillis
Matris nutriuntur in vitam, neque percipiunt de corpore
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Christi</hi> procedentem nitidissimum fontem; sed effodiunt sibi
lacus detritos de fossis terrenis, et de cœno putidam bibunt
aquam, effugientes fidem Ecclesiæ, ne traducantur; rejicientes
vero Spiritum, ut non erudiantur.&mdash;&mdash;2. Alienati vero a veritate,
digne in omni volutantur errore, fluctuati ab eo, aliter atque aliter
per tempora de eisdem sentientes, et nunquam sententiam
stabilitam habentes, sophistæ verborum magis volentes esse quam
discipuli veritatis: non enim sunt fundati super unam petram,
sed super arenam.&mdash;&mdash;V. xx. 2. Fugere igitur oportet sententias
ipsorum (of the Gnostics), et intentius observare necubi vexemur
ab ipsis; confugere autem ad Ecclesiam, et in ejus sinu
educari, et Dominicis scripturis enutriri. Plantata enim est Ecclesia,
paradisus in hoc mundo: <q>ab omni</q> ergo <q>ligno paradisi
escas manducabitis,</q> ait Spiritus Dei; id est, ab omni scriptura
Dominica manducate.</note>:
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
she is appointed for the quickening of creation<note place='foot'>III. xxiv. 1. supra.</note>, and
in her is the way of life<note place='foot'>III. iv. 1. Tantæ igitur ostensiones cum sint, non oportet
adhuc quærere apud alios veritatem, quam facile est ab Ecclesia
sumere; cum Apostoli, quasi in depositorium dives, plenissime
in eam contulerint omnia quæ sint veritatis: uti omnis quicumque
velit, sumat ex ea potum vitæ. Hæc est enim vitæ introitus;
omnes autem reliqui fures sunt et latrones. Propter quod
oportet devitare quidem illos; quæ autem sunt Ecclesiæ, cum
summa diligentia diligere, et apprehendere veritatis Traditionem.</note>, which those who keep
aloof from her do not possess<note place='foot'>III. xxiv. 1. supra.</note>; in her is the Holy
Spirit, which is not to be found out of her<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>. She
possesses the adoption and inheritance of Abraham,
and her members are consequently the seed of Abraham<note place='foot'>IV. viii. 1. Deum, qui in regnum cœlorum introducit Abraham,
et semen ejus quod est Ecclesia, per Christum Jesum, cui
et adoptio redditur, et hæreditas quæ Abrahæ promissa est.</note>.
Being thus appointed for the quickening of
the world, by being the way of life to its members,
she has for that purpose received the faith from the
Apostles, which it is her business to distribute to her
children<note place='foot'>III. Præf. quoted p. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, note 10.&mdash;&mdash;V. xx. 1. Et Ecclesiæ
quidem prædicatio vera et firma, apud quam una et eadem salutis
via in universo mundo ostenditur. Huic enim creditum est
lumen Dei.... Ubique enim Ecclesia prædicat veritatem; et
hæc est ἑπτάμυξος lucerna, Christi bajulans lumen.</note>. She is therefore the appointed preacher
of the faith, or the truth, which is not variable and
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
changeable, but one, and only one<note place='foot'>I. ix. 5. Καὶ ἐκ τούτου γὰρ (the exhibition of the inconsistency
of error) ἀκριβῶς συνιδεῖν ἔσται, καὶ πρὸ τῆς ἀποδείξεως,
βεβαίαν τὴν ὑπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας κηρυσσομένην ἀλήθειαν.&mdash;x. 3.
cited p. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, note 5.&mdash;&mdash;III. xii. 7. Ecclesia vero per universum
mundum ab Apostolis firmum habens initium, in una et eadem de
Deo et de Filio ejus perseverat sententia.</note>; not merely a
quality infused into the heart, but a form of truths
embodied or summed up in words, and delivered to
her members when they are initiated into her<note place='foot'>I. ix. 4. See p. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, note 6.</note>.
Her ancient system is therefore the guide to truth<note place='foot'>IV. xxxiii. 8. Γνῶσις ἀληθὴς, ἡ τῶν ἀποστόλων διδαχὴ, καὶ
τὸ ἀρχαῖον τῆς ἐκκλησίας σύστημα κατὰ παντὸς τοῦ κόσμου, et
character corporis Christi secundum successiones Episcoporum,
quibus illi eam, quæ in unoquoque loco est Ecclesiam tradiderunt:
quæ pervenit usque ad nos custoditione sine fictione
Scripturarum tractatio plenissima, neque additamentum neque
ablationem recipiens; et lectio sine falsatione, et secundum Scripturas
expositio legitima, et diligens, et sine periculo, et sine
blasphemia.</note>,
and those who wish to know it must have recourse
to her, and be brought up in her bosom<note place='foot'>V. xx. 2. See p. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, note 5.</note>. Her testimony,
moreover, is confirmed by the Apostles and
Prophets<note place='foot'>III. xxiv. 1. cited ibid.</note>, whose writings are kept in the custody
of her elders<note place='foot'>IV. xxxii. 1. Post deinde et omnis sermo ei constabit, si et
Scripturas diligenter legerit apud eos qui in Ecclesia sunt presbyteri,
apud quos est apostolica doctrina.</note>, with which, moreover, those must
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
expect to be fed who come to her<note place='foot'>V. xx. 2. See p. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, note 5.</note>. She has succeeded
to the office of the ancient Jewish Church
of being the great witness of the unity of the Godhead<note place='foot'>II. ix. 1. Veteribus quidem et in primis a protoplasti traditione
hanc suadelam custodientibus, et unum Deum, fabricatorem
cœli et terræ hymnizantibus; reliquis autem post eos a prophetis
Dei hujus rei commemorationem accipientibus....
Ecclesia autem omnis per universum orbem hanc accepit ab
apostolis traditionem.</note>.
</p>

<p>
To show that she is commissioned from above, she
wrought continual miracles for the good of the
world by prayer and invocation of the name of
Jesus<note place='foot'>II. xxxii. 4, 5. See p. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, note 8.</note>; she even raised the dead by means of fasting
and prayer<note place='foot'>II. xxxi. 2. cited ibid.</note>; and she alone produced persons
who sealed their own sincerity and the truth of their
faith by their blood<note place='foot'>IV. xxxiii. 9. Quapropter Ecclesia omni in loco ob eam
quam habet erga Deum dilectionem, multitudinem martyrum in
omni tempore præmittit ad Patrem; reliquis autem omnibus non
tantum non habentibus hanc rem ostendere apud se, sed nec quidem
necessarium esse dicentibus tale martyrium; esse enim martyrium
verum sententiam eorum: nisi si unus, aut duo aliquando,
per omne tempus ex quo Dominus apparuit in terris, cum martyribus
nostris, quasi et ipse misericordiam consequutus, opprobrium
simul bajulavit nominis, et cum eis ductus est, velut adjectio
quædam donata eis.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Finally, although not exempt from weakness, and
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
capable of losing whole members, she, as a body,
remains imperishable<note place='foot'>IV. xxxi. 3. Ecclesia, quæ est sal terræ, subrelicta est in
confinio terræ, patiens quæ sunt humana; et, dum sæpe auferuntur
ab ea membra integra, perseverat statua salis.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It is remarkable how strictly this notion of an
external, visible, ascertainable body, consisting of
individuals, and under the government of individual
officers, having a personal succession in distinct localities<note place='foot'>See pp. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>.</note>,
is in accordance with the doctrine of the
Church of England; and how totally opposed it is
to the notions held amongst dissenters, and by individuals
within the Church in modern times. According
to Irenæus, moreover, the different classes of sectaries
would be regarded as having neither spiritual
life nor the Holy Spirit, <emph>except</emph> so far as they might be
supposed to be in communion with the body governed
by elders or bishops descended from the Apostles.
If in any way or to any degree they can be supposed
to be in communion with them, to that extent they
would be thought to have the Holy Ghost, and to
be in the way of life, but no further. I am not now
discussing whether he was right or wrong; I am
merely pointing out the contrariety between his
views of the Church and those which appear to be
most popular at present. I doubt if most Protestants
would not pronounce his doctrine to be gross
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
bigotry; for very many of those who would go so
far with him as to acknowledge the Church to be a
visible society, would be very far from restricting
the grace of the Holy Spirit to the communion of
the bishops in succession from the Apostles.
</p>

<p>
I must, however, direct more particular attention
to one part of his system which did not require to
be brought out prominently. We have seen that
he thought it possible for the Church to lose whole
members. In fact, although he thought that the
truth was kept up by the succession of bishops
<emph>throughout the Church</emph>, and that it was a mark of
truth to be so kept up, he still believed that presbyters
or bishops might, through pride, or other evil
motives, make schisms in the Church<note place='foot'>IV. xxvi. 2. Quapropter eis qui in Ecclesia sunt, Presbyteris
obaudire oportet, his qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, sicut
ostendimus; qui cum Episcopatus successione charisma veritatis
certum secundum placitum Patris acceperunt: reliquos vero, qui
absistunt a principali successione, et quocumque loco colligunt,
suspectos habere; vel quasi hæreticos, et malæ sententiæ; vel
quasi scindentes, et elatos, et sibi placentes; aut rursus ut hypocritas,
quæstus gratia et vanæ gloriæ hoc operantes. Omnes
autem hi deciderunt a veritate.&mdash;&mdash;3. Qui vero crediti quidem
sunt a multis esse presbyteri, serviunt autem suis voluptatibus,
et non præponunt timorem Dei in cordibus suis, sed contumeliis
agunt reliquos, et principalis concessionis tumore elati sunt, et in
absconsis agunt mala, et dicunt, <q>Nemo nos videt,</q> redarguentur
a Verbo.</note>; and he taught
that those were to be adhered to who, with the succession,
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
keep the Apostles' doctrine, and lead good
lives<note place='foot'>IV. xxvi. 4. Ab omnibus igitur talibus absistere oportet,
adhærere vero his qui et apostolorum, sicut prædiximus, doctrinam
custodiunt, et cum presbyterii ordine sermonem sanum
et conversationem sine offensa præstant, ad confirmationem et
correptionem reliquorum.&mdash;&mdash;5. Ubi igitur charismata Domini
posita sunt, ibi discere oportet veritatem, apud quos est ea quæ
est ab Apostolis Ecclesiæ successio, et id quod est sanum et irreprobabile
conversationis, et inadulteratum et incorruptibile sermonis
constat.</note>; implying, of course, that some who were in
the succession might depart from the Apostles' doctrine.
The succession was not, therefore, in his opinion,
an infallible test of truth in the individual
Church. Any individual Church, or even a considerable
number or collection of Churches, might fall
into heresy, and thus become cut off from the
Church; but it is evident that he did not think this
possible to happen to the great body of the Church.
</p>

<p>
It is manifest from this that he thought the private
Christian must sometimes pass judgment upon
his bishop, and might be called upon to separate from
him, and to adhere to those who were more orthodox.
In what cases this was requisite, or what was
to be the extent of the alienation, he does not give
any hint; but this clearly establishes that he thought
private judgment upon religious controversy to be
sometimes a duty: for without the exercise of private
judgment upon the part of the layman, it would
be in some cases impossible for him to show his
preference for those bishops who adhered to the
Apostles' doctrine.
</p>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<p>
We find no trace in Irenæus of any authority in
the Church of Rome to decide controversies for the
rest of the Church. On the contrary, he taught
Christians to have recourse to any ancient apostolical
Church, or rather collection of Churches<note place='foot'>See III. iii. 1. p. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, note 7; ibid. 2. p. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, note 9; ibid. 4.
p. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, notes 2 and 3.</note>, if they
wished to ascertain the traditional system of the
Church. He indeed quotes that Church as being in
his time a more important witness to the truth than
any other individual Church, because, through the
continual concourse of Christians thither, in consequence
of its more powerful pre-eminence, the traditions
of the universal Church were there collected
as it were into a focus<note place='foot'>III. iii. 2. See pp. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> and <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>.</note>; but, as I have pointed out
elsewhere<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>.</note>, he recognises no authority in that Church
to <emph>claim</emph> to decide controversies. With him it is not
any individual Church that is commissioned to preserve
the truth, not even the Church of Jerusalem,
which he calls the mother of all Churches (a title
which has been since arrogated by the Roman
Church), but the Catholic Church, truly so called, by
the mouth of her pastors throughout the world; for
although he mentions the pre-eminence of the Church
of Rome in his day as a matter of <emph>fact</emph>, he does not
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
state it to be a matter of <emph>right</emph>; nor does he ground
any thing upon it but the further fact that it followed,
of course, that Christians resorted to it from
all quarters, as they did afterwards to Constantinople.
He gives no hint as to the source of that pre-eminence,
other than its having been settled by the <emph>two</emph>
Apostles St. Peter and <emph>St. Paul</emph>, and honoured with
being the scene of their martyrdom<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, note 9, and p. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, note 8.</note>. And his appeal
to it he builds, not on any authority residing in
it, but upon the fact that <emph>at that time</emph> the confluence
from all parts of the Church caused the tradition of
the whole Church to be best preserved there, as was
afterwards the case at Constantinople, and has since
been no where. So that his appeal to Rome is not
in fact an appeal to that Church, but to the Church
universal; and since Rome has ceased to be the
place of resort to the universal Church, the ground
for appealing to her has ceased likewise.
</p>

<p>
On the subject of the Bishops of the primitive
Church several questions have arisen, and it is of
course highly desirable to know whether Irenæus
furnishes any evidence on either side of them. It is
not to be expected that we can discuss any of them
<emph>fully</emph> by the aid of any single writer; but such indications
as we meet with may with propriety be
drawn out.
</p>

<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>

<p>
That which first demands our notice is whether
Bishops existed, as a distinct order from Presbyters,
from the beginning.
</p>

<p>
Now Irenæus does undoubtedly call the same persons
by the <emph>name</emph> of Bishops and Presbyters interchangeably.
But it has been long ago pointed out
that the circumstance of the same <emph>name</emph> being borne
by persons holding two different offices, proves nothing.
It is unsafe to infer from the circumstance
that <emph>bishops</emph> are called <emph>presbyters</emph>, or <emph>presbyters bishops</emph>,
that therefore there was not a permanent officer set
over the other presbyters, and endued with functions
which they could not exercise, although not at first
distinguished by a specific name.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, we learn from him that there
were to be found in every part of the Christian world
bishops or presbyters placed at the head of Churches,
which from their importance, must have had other
presbyters in them, and which we know from other
sources to have had other presbyters in them; that
there was only one of these at one and the same
time; that they were intrusted with the government
of the Churches, and called the Bishops of those
Churches; that the authority of the office was handed
down from individual to individual; and that the
individuals who filled this office, and by consequence
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
the office itself, were appointed by inspired apostles<note place='foot'>See pp. <ref target='Pg057'>57-59</ref>, and the passages there adduced.</note>.
All these facts are irreconcileable with the hypothesis
that all presbyters were equal in authority and
function.
</p>

<p>
The question whether these bishops and presbyters
might not have been simply pastors of independent
congregations, is answered by finding that they had
other presbyters under them, (as Irenæus under
Pothinus, and Florinus and Blastus under the
Bishops of Rome,) and <emph>that</emph> in places such as Rome,
where there were probably more congregations than
one.
</p>

<p>
There is nothing in Irenæus to favour the idea
that the subject-presbyters were not properly clergymen;
on the contrary, the letter of the martyrs to
Eleutherius would appear to speak of Irenæus as a
clergyman, when we at the same time know him to
have been a presbyter: and it does appear in the
highest degree improbable that the flourishing
Church of Rome, which we know to have been the
place of residence of two Apostles at once, should
have been left, down to Irenæus's time, with only a
single clergyman in it, which must have been the
case upon this theory; to say nothing of Smyrna,
which, according to the same scheme, must have
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
been left destitute of spiritual superintendence during
Polycarp's visit to Rome, which S. Irenæus has
recorded.
</p>

<p>
But granting the <emph>existence</emph> of Bishops such as we
have them now, and their appointment by Apostles,
another question arises, first suggested, so far as we
know, by S. Jerome, whether the powers now exclusively
reserved to Bishops, such as ordination and
government, were so exclusively delegated to them
by the Apostles, as that those powers exercised by
other presbyters are invalid. The question does not
appear to have occurred to Irenæus: but we have
no hint in him of other presbyters having the same
authority as the bishops of the Churches; on the
other hand, he expressly states that the Apostles
committed the Churches to the government and
teaching of individual bishops or presbyters in each,
<emph>making them their successors, and giving them their own
office</emph><note place='foot'>&mdash;quos et successores relinquebant, suum ipsorum locum
magisterii tradentes. See p. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, note 7.</note>. And the very circumstance of their committing
the Churches to those individuals did (by what appears
to me inevitable consequence) exclude all others
from <emph>the same place</emph> to which those individuals were
appointed, and constitute them an order by themselves.
And that the universal Church understood
the appointment in that sense is proved by the fact,
recorded by Irenæus, that the succession of authority
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
was kept up in individuals down to his time;
the evident implication being that it was so in all
Churches.
</p>

<p>
The evidence, therefore, supplied by Irenæus, although
not enabling us, <emph>by itself</emph>, to discuss the whole
question fully, is in support of the discipline of the
Church of England, which refuses to recognize the
ordinations of any but bishops, properly so called,
and having their authority in succession from the
Apostles<note place='foot'>See the Preface to the Ordination Services.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. On The Doctrine of the Holy Trinity.</head>

<p>
The controversy which Irenæus carried on with the
Gnostics being directly and explicitly on the subject
of the Divine Nature, led him to treat distinctly of
the divinity and humanity of Christ and his incarnation,
of the providential government of God, and
his various manifestations. He is thus led, almost
of necessity, to enunciate the doctrine of the Trinity
in Unity in various aspects, but most especially in
regard to the twofold nature of Christ.
</p>

<p>
In direct reference to the doctrine of the Trinity
in Unity, he describes the agency of the three Persons
in the creation of man; the Father willing and
commanding, the Son ministering and forming, the
Spirit sustaining and nourishing him<note place='foot'>IV. xxxviii. 3. Ὁ γεννητὸς καὶ πεπλασμένος ἄνθρωπος κατ᾽
εἰκόνα καὶ ὁμοίωσιν τοῦ ἀγεννήτου γίνεται Θεοῦ· τοῦ μὲν Πατρὸς
εὐδοκοῦντος καὶ κελεύοντος, τοῦ δὲ Υἱοῦ πράσσοντος καὶ δημιουργοῦντος,
τοῦ δὲ Πνεύματος τρέφοντος καὺ αὔξοντος.</note>. So again
he declares that God made all things by his Word
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
or Son, and Wisdom or Spirit, using the terms personally;
and that this was the same thing as making
them by himself<note place='foot'>I. xxii. 1. Omnia per ipsum fecit Pater ... non per angelos,
neque per virtutes aliquas abscissas ab ejus sententia (nihil
enim indiget omnium Deus), sed et per Verbum et Spiritum suum
omnia faciens et disponens et gubernans, et omnibus esse præstans.&mdash;&mdash;II.
xxx. 9. Hic Pater, hic Deus, hic Conditor, hic
Factor, hic Fabricator, qui fecit ea per semetipsum, hoc est, per
Verbum et per Sapientiam suam, cœlum et terram et maria et
omnia quæ in eis sunt.&mdash;&mdash;IV. vii. 4. Hæc enim Filius, qui est
Verbum Dei, ab initio præstruebat; non indigente Patre angelis,
uti faceret conditionem et formaret hominem ... sed habente
copiosum et inenarrabile ministerium: ministrat enim ei ad omnia
sua progenies et figuratio sua, id est Filius et Spiritus Sanctus,
Verbum et Sapientia; quibus serviunt et subjecti sunt omnes
angeli.</note>, because they are his hands<note place='foot'>V. i. 3. Sic in fine Verbum Patris et Spiritus Dei, adunitus
antiquæ substantiæ plasmationis Adæ, viventem et perfectum
effecit hominem, capientem perfectum Patrem ... non enim
effugit aliquando Adam manus Dei, ad quas Pater loquens, dicit:
<q>Faciamus hominem ad imaginem et similitudinem nostrum.</q>&mdash;xxviii.
4. Plasmatus initio homo per manus Dei, id est, Filii
et Spiritus, fit secundum imaginem et similitudinem Dei.</note>. And
again, in explaining God's dispensations in regard to
man, he affirms<note place='foot'>IV. xx. 5. Potens est enim in omnibus Deus; visus quidem
tunc per Spiritum prophetiæ, visus autem et per Filium adoptive,
videbitur autem et in regno cœlorum paternaliter: Spiritu quidem
præparante hominem in Filio Dei, Filio autem adducente ad
Patrem, Patre autem incorruptelam donante in æternam vitam,
quæ unicuique evenit ex eo quod videat Deum.</note> that God was seen under the Old
Testament by the Spirit of prophecy, that he was
seen subsequently by means of the Son, adoptively,
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
i. e. adopting human nature into the divine<note place='foot'>III. xix. 1. Εἰς τοῦτο γὰρ ὁ Λόγος ἄνθρωπος, et qui Filius
Dei est Filius hominis factus est, commixtus Verbo Dei, ἵνα ὁ
ἄνθρωπος (i. e. human nature) τὸν Λόγον χωρήσας, καὶ τὴν υἱοθεσίαν
λαβὼν, υἱὸς γένηται Θεοῦ.</note>, and
that he will be seen in his character of Father in the
kingdom of heaven; and that in this way the Spirit
in the Son prepares man, and the Son brings him to
the Father, and the Father grants to him immortality:
and so again in the work of man's redemption<note place='foot'>IV. xx. 6. Per omnia enim hæc Deus Pater ostenditur, Spiritu
quidem operante, Filio vero ministrante, Patre vero comprobante,
homine vero consummato ad salutem.</note>,
the Spirit operates, the Son supplies, the Father
approves, and man is perfected to salvation. He
likewise gives two statements of the substance of the
Creed, in which the three Persons of the Trinity are
spoken of in the same manner as in the Nicene
Creed, both of which will be given in a subsequent
chapter.
</p>

<p>
These are all the passages, so far as I have been
able to discover, which speak of the three Persons
of the most Holy Trinity together; but the doctrine
is <emph>implied</emph> throughout.
</p>

<p>
On the twofold nature of Christ, and especially on
his divinity, he is more full. Indeed it would take
more space than I can spare to introduce all the
passages which bear upon the subject.
</p>

<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>

<p>
Very near the beginning of his treatise, in rehearsing
the faith of the Church, he speaks of
<q>Christ Jesus our Lord and God and Saviour and
King<note place='foot'>I. x. 1. Ἡ μὲν γὰρ Ἐκκλησία, καίπερ καθ᾽ ὅλης τῆς οἰκουμένης
ἕως περάτων τῆς γῆς διεσπαρμένη, παρὰ δὲ τῶν Ἀποστόλων,
καὶ τῶν ἐκείνων μαθητῶν παραλαβοῦσα τὴν εἰς ἕνα Θεὸν, Πατέρα
παντοκράτορα, τὸν πεποιηκότα τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν καὸ τὰς
θαλάσσας καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐν αὐτοῖς, πίστιν· καὶ εἰς ἕνα Χριστὸν
Ἰησοῦν, τὸν Υἱὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ, τὸν σαρκωθέντα ὑπὲρ τῆς ἡμετέρας σωτηρίας·
καὶ εἰς Πνεῦμα ἅγιον, τὸ διὰ τῶν προφητῶν κεκηρυχὸς τὰς
οἰκονομίας καὶ τὰς ἐλεύσεις, καὶ τὴν ἐκ παρθένου γέννησιν, καὶ τὸ
πάθος, καὶ τὴν ἔγερσιν ἐκ νεκρῶν, καὶ τὴν ἔνσαρκον εἰς τοὶς οὐρανοὺς
ἀνάληψιν τοῦ ἠγαπημένου Χριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν,
καὶ τὴν ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν ἐν τῇ δοξῇ τοῦ Πατρὸς παρουσίαν αὐτοῦ,
ἐπὶ τὸ ἀνακεφαλαιώσασθαι τὰ πάντα, καὶ ἀναστῆσαι πᾶσαν σάρκα
πάσης ἀνθρωπότητος, ἵνα Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ τῷ Κυρίῳ ἡμῶν καὶ
Θεῷ καὶ σωτήρι καὶ βασιλεῖ, κατὰ τὴν εὐδοκίαν τοῦ Πατρὸς τοῦ
ἀοράτου, πᾶν γόνυ κάμψῃ ἐπουρανίων καὶ ἐπιγείων καὶ καταχθονίων,
καὶ πᾶσα γλώσσα ἐξομολογήσηται αὐτῷ, καὶ κρίσιν δικαίαν
ἐν τοῖς πᾶσι ποιήσηται, τὰ μὲν πνευματικὰ τῆς πονηρίας, καὶ ἀγγέλους
παραβεβηκότας καὶ ἐν ἀποστασίᾳ γεγονότας, καὶ τοὺς ἀσεβεῖς
καὶ ἀδίκους καὶ ἀνόμους καὶ βλασφήμους τῶν ἀνθρώπων εἰς τὸ
αἰώνιον πῦρ πέμψῃ· τοῖς δὲ δικαίοις καὶ ὁσίοις καὶ τὰς ἐντολὰς
αὐτοῦ τετηρηκόσι, καὶ ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ αὐτοῦ διαμεμενηκόσι, τοῖς ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς,
τοῖς δὲ ἐκ μετανοίας, ζωὴν χαρισάμενος, ἀφθαρσίαν δωρήσηται,
καὶ δόξαν αἰωνίαν περιποιήση.&mdash;2. Τοῦτο τὸ κήρυγμα παρειληφυῖα,
καὶ ταύτην τὴν πίστιν, ὡς προέφαμεν, ἡ Ἐκκλησία, καίπερ ἐν ὅλῳ
τῷ κόσμῳ διεσπαρμένη, ἐπιμελῶς φυλάσσει.&mdash;A translation of this
passage will be found in the chapter <hi rend='italic'>on Creeds</hi>.</note>;</q> further on he quotes many passages of
Scripture to show that he was spoken of absolutely
and definitely as God and Lord<note place='foot'>III. vi. 1. Vere igitur cum Pater sit Dominus, et Filius vere
sit Dominus, merito Spiritus Sanctus Domini appellatione signavit
eos. Et iterum in eversione Sodomitarum Scriptura ait: <q>Et
pluit Dominus super Sodomam et Gomorrham ignem et sulfur a
Domino de cœlo.</q> Filium enim hic significat, qui et Abrahæ
colloquutus sit, a Patre accepisse potestatem ad judicandum Sodomitas,
propter iniquitatem eorum. Similiter habet illud: <q>Sedes
tua, Deus, in æternum; virga directionis, virga regni tui.
Dilexisti justitiam, et odisti iniquitatem, propterea unxit te Deus,
Deus tuus.</q> Utrosque enim Dei appellatione signavit Spiritus,
et eum qui ungitur, Filium, et eum qui ungit, id est, Patrem.&mdash;2.
Nemo igitur alius, quemadmodum prædixi, Deus nominatur
aut Dominus appellatur, nisi qui est omnium Deus et Dominus,
qui et Moysi dixit: <q>Ego sum qui sum: et sic dices filiis
Israel: Qui est, misit me ad vos:</q> et hujus Filius Jesus Christus
Dominus noster, qui filios Dei facit credentes in nomen suum.</note>, and asks the question,
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
How would men be saved, if He who wrought
out their salvation upon earth was not God<note place='foot'>IV. xxxiii. 4. Πῶς δύνανται σωθῆναι, εἰ μὴ ὁ Θεὸς ἦν ὁ τὴν
σωτηρίαν αὐτῶν ἐπὶ γῆς ἐργασάμενος; ἢ πῶς ἄνθρωπος χωρήσει
εἰς Θεὸν, εἰ μὴ ὁ Θεὸς ἐχωρήθη εἰς ἄνθρωπον?</note>?
</p>

<p>
He asserts that the Word was with God from everlasting<note place='foot'>II. xxv. 3. Non enim infectus es, O homo, neque semper
coëxsistebas Deo, sicut proprium ejus Verbum.&mdash;&mdash;xxx. 9. Semper
autem coëxsistens Filius Patri, olim et ab initio semper revelat
Patrem, et angelis et archangelis et potestatibus et virtutibus,
et omnibus quibus vult revelare Deus.&mdash;&mdash;III. xviii. 1. Ostenso
manifeste, quod in principio Verbum exsistens apud Deum, per
quem omnia facta sunt, qui et semper aderat generi humano,
hunc in novissimis temporibus secundum præfinitum tempus a
Patre, unitum suo plasmati, passibilem hominem factum; exclusa
est omnis contradictio dicentium: <q>Si ergo tunc natus est, non
erat ergo ante Christus.</q> Ostendimus enim, quia non tunc cœpit
Filius Dei, exsistens semper apud Patrem.</note>,
and that Jesus was the Son of God before
the creation<note place='foot'>Frag. xxxvii. Χριστὸς, ὁ πρὸ αἰώνων κληθεὶς Θεοῦ Υἱός.</note>, that no man knows the mode of his
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
generation<note place='foot'>II. xxviii. 6. Si quis itaque nobis dixerit <q>Quomodo ergo
Filius prolatus a Patre est?</q> dicimus ei, quia prolationem istam
sive generationem sive nuncupationem sive adapertionem, aut quolibet
quis nomine vocaverit generationem ejus, inerrabilem exsistentem
nemo novit.</note>, and that God made all things by his
indefatigable Word, who is the Artificer of all things,
and sitteth upon the cherubim, and preserves all
things<note place='foot'>II. ii. 4. Nullius indigens omnium Deus Verbo condidit
omnia et fecit; neque angelis indigens adjutoribus ad ea quæ
fiunt ... omnia autem quæ facta sunt infatigabili Verbo
fecit.&mdash;&mdash;III. xi. 8. Ὁ τῶν ἁπάντων τεχνίτης Λόγος, ὁ καθημένος
ἐπὶ τῶν χερουβίμ καὶ συνέχων τὰ πάντα.</note>. He declares that the Lord who spake to
Abraham was the Son<note place='foot'>III. vi. 1. p. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, note 8.</note>, and that it was the Word
that appeared to Moses<note place='foot'>IV. xx. 9. Et Verbum quidem loquebatur Moysi, apparens
in conspectu.</note>.
</p>

<p>
This Divine Word, then, was united with his creature<note place='foot'>III. xvi. 6. Hujus Verbum unigenitus, qui semper humano
generi adest, unitus et consparsus suo plasmati secundum placitum
Patris et caro factus, ipse est Jesus Christus Dominus noster;
qui passus est pro nobis, et surrexit propter nos, et rursus venturus
in gloria Patris ad resuscitandum universam carnem, et ad
ostensionem salutis, et regulam justi judicii ostendere omnibus,
qui sub ipso facti sunt.&mdash;&mdash;IV. xxxiii. 11. Οἱ τὸν ἐκ τῆς παρθένου
Ἐμμανουὴλ κηρύττοντες, τὴν ἕνωσιν τοῦ Λόγου τοῦ Θεοῦ
πρὸς τὸ πλάσμα αὐτοῦ ἐδήλουν.</note>,
(which union is expressed by the name <hi rend='italic'>Emmanuel</hi><note place='foot'>IV. xxxiii. 11. supra.&mdash;III. xxi. 4. Diligenter igitur significavit
Spiritus Sanctus, per ea quæ dicta sunt (Isai. vii. 10, &amp;c.)
generationem ejus quæ est ex Virgine, et substantiam, quoniam
Deus: Emmanuel enim nomen hoc significat.</note>,)
and humbled himself to take upon him
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
the infant state of man<note place='foot'>IV. xxxviii. 2. Συνενηπίαζεν Υἱὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ, τέλειος ὢν, τῷ
ἀνθρώπῳ, οὐ δι᾽ ἑαυτὸν, ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου νήπιον.</note>, and thus having become
Son of man<note place='foot'>III. x. 2. Christus Jesus Dominus noster, Filius Dei altissimi,
qui per legem et prophetas promisit salutarem suum facturum
se omni carni visibilem, ut fieret Filius hominis, ad hoc ut
et homo fieret filius Dei.&mdash;&mdash;xvi. 6. supra.</note>, went through all the ages of man<note place='foot'>II. xxii. 4. Non reprobans, nec supergrediens hominem, neque
solvens legem in se humani generis, sed omnem ætatem sanctificans
per illam, quæ ad ipsum erat, similitudinem. Omnes
enim venit per semetipsum salvare: omnes, inquam, qui per eum
renascuntur in Deum, infantes, et parvulos, et pueros, et juvenes,
et seniores. Ideo per omnem venit ætatem, et infantibus infans
factus, sanctificans infantes: in parvulis parvulus, sanctificans
hanc ipsam habentes ætatem, simul et exemplum illis pietatis
effectus et justitiæ et subjectionis: in juvenibus juvenis, exemplum
juvenibus fiens, et sanctificans Domino. Sic et senior in
senioribus, ut sit perfectus magister in omnibus, non solum secundum
expositionem veritatis, sed et secundum ætatem, sanctificans
simul et seniores, exemplum ipsis quoque fiens. Deinde et usque
ad mortem pervenit, ut sit <q>primogenitus ex mortuis, ipse primatum
tenens in omnibus,</q> princeps vitæ, prior omnium, et præcedens
omnes.</note>,
and finally hung upon the cross<note place='foot'>III. xvi. 6. supra.&mdash;V. xviii. 1. Ipsum Verbum Dei incarnatum
suspensum est super lignum.</note>. He asserts, moreover,
that although the angels knew the Father
solely by the revelation of the Son<note place='foot'>II. xxx. 9. Hic Pater Domini nostri Jesu Christi, per Verbum
suum, qui est Filius ejus, per eum revelatur et manifestatur
omnibus quibus revelatur. See also p. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, note 1.</note>, and indeed all
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
from the beginning have known God by the Son<note place='foot'>IV. vii. 2. Omnes, qui ab initio cognitum habuerunt Deum
et adventum Christi prophetaverunt, revelationem acceperunt ab
ipso Filio.</note>,
so that the Father is the Son invisible, and the
Son the Father visible<note place='foot'>IV. vi. 6. Et per ipsum Verbum visibilem et palpabilem factum
Pater ostendebatur, etiamsi non omnes similiter credebant ei;
sed omnes viderunt in Filio Patrem: invisibile etenim Filii Pater,
visibile autem Patris Filius.</note>, yet that the Son knew not
the day of judgment<note place='foot'>II. xxviii. 6. Ipse Filius Dei ipsum judicii diem et horam
concessit scire solum Patrem.</note>; and that this was so ordered,
that we may learn that the Father is above all<note place='foot'>Ibid 8. Etenim si quis exquirat causam, propter quam in
omnibus Pater communicans Filio, solus scire horam et diem a
Domino manifestatus est; neque aptabilem magis neque decentiorem,
nec sine periculo alteram quam hanc inveniat in præsenti
... ut discamus per ipsum, super omnia esse Patrem.</note>,
and that the Son ministers to the Father<note place='foot'>IV. vi. 7. Omnia autem Filius administrans Patri, perfecit ab
initio usque ad finem.</note>: finally,
that when Jesus was tempted and suffered, the Word
in him restrained his energy<note place='foot'>III. xix. 3. Ὥσπερ γὰρ ἦν ἄνθρωπος, ἵνα πειρασθῇ, οὕτω καὶ
Λόγος, ἵνα δοξασθῇ· ἡσυχάζοντος μὲν τοῦ Λόγου ἐν τῷ πειράζεσθαι
et inhonorari καὶ σταυροῦσθαι καὶ ἀποθνήσκειν, συγγινομένου δὲ
τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ ἐν τῷ νικᾷν καὶ ὑπομένειν καὶ χρηστεύεσθαι καὶ ἀνίστασθαι
καὶ ἀναλαμβάνεσθαι.</note>. But he declares
likewise that Christ remained in the bosom of the
Father, even when upon earth<note place='foot'>III. xi. 5. Hic (Deus) et benedictionem escæ et gratiam
potus in novissimis temporibus per Filium suum donat humano
generi, incomprehensibilis per comprehensibilem, et invisibilis per
visibilem; cum extra eum non sit, sed in sinu Patris exsistat.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>

<p>
These mysteries in the nature of Christ Irenæus
does not attempt to explain, fully holding the eternal
and unchangeable Divinity of the Son, even when
made flesh, and his strict personal union with that
flesh, and at the same time asserting his subordination
to the Father, even in his divine nature;
feeling that when we cannot discover the reason of
every thing, we should consider the immeasureable
difference between us and God<note place='foot'>II. xxv. 3. Si autem et aliquis non invenerit causam omnium
quæ requiruntur, cogitet quia homo est in infinitum minor Deo, et
qui ex parte acceperit gratiam, et qui nondum æqualis vel similis
sit Factori, et qui omnium experientiam et cogitationem habere
non possit, ut Deus: sed in quantum minor est ab eo, qui factus
non est et qui semper idem est, ille qui hodie factus est et initium
facturæ accepit; in tantum secundum scientiam, et ad investigandum
causas omnium, minorem esse eo qui fecit.</note>; that if we cannot
explain earthly things, we cannot expect to explain
heavenly things, and that what we cannot
explain we must leave to God<note place='foot'>II. xxviii. 2. Et non est mirum, si in spiritalibus et cœlestibus,
et in his quæ habent revelari, hoc patimur nos; quandoquidem
etiam eorum quæ ante pedes sunt (dico autem quæ sunt in
hac creatura, quæ et contrectantur a nobis et videntur et sunt nobiscum)
multa fugerunt nostram scientiam, et Deo hæc ipsa committimus.&mdash;3.
Εἰ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν τῆς κτίσεως ἔνια μὲν ἀνάκειται τῷ
Θεῷ, ἔνια δὲ καὶ εἰς γνῶσιν ἐλήλυθε τὴν ἡμετέραν, τί χαλεπὸν, εἰ
καὶ τῶν ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς ζητουμένων, ὅλων τῶν γραφῶν πνευματικῶν
οὐσῶν, ἔνια μὲν ἐπιλύομεν κατὰ χάριν Θεοῦ, ἔνια δὲ ἀνακείσεται
τῷ Θεῷ?</note>; and in short that it
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
is much better to know nothing but Christ crucified,
than by subtil inquiries to fall into impiety<note place='foot'>II. xxvi. 1. Ἄμεινον καὶ συμφερώτερον, ἰδιώτας καὶ ὀλιγομαθεῖς
ὑπάρχειν, καὶ διὰ τῆς ἀγάπης πλησίον γενέσθαι τοῦ Θεοῖ, ἢ
πολυμαθεῖς καὶ ἐμπείρους δοκοῦντας εἶναι, βλασφήμους εἰς τὸν ἑαυτῶν
εὑρίσκεσθαι δεσπότην.... Melius itaque est, sicuti prædixi,
nihil omnino scientem quempiam, ne quidem unam causam cujuslibet
eorum quæ facta sunt, cur factum sit, credere Deo, et perseverare
eos in dilectione, aut (ἢ&mdash;rather <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quam</foreign>) per hujusmodi
scientiam inflatos excidere a dilectione, quæ hominem vivificat:
nec aliud inquirere ad scientiam, nisi Jesum Christum Filium
Dei, qui pro nobis crucifixus est, aut (ἢ) per quæstionum subtilitates
et minutiloquium in impietatem cadere.</note>.
</p>

<p>
This Jesus, then, who has been testified of by all
things that he was truly God and truly man<note place='foot'>IV. vi. 7. Ab omnibus accipiens testimonium quoniam vere
homo et quoniam vere Deus, a Patre, a Spiritu, ab angelis, ab
ipsa conditione, ab hominibus, et ab apostaticis spiritibus et dæmoniis
et ab inimico et novissime ab ipsa morte.</note>, being
related to both God and man, and thus having the
indispensable qualification for his office, became the
Mediator between them<note place='foot'>III. xviii. 7. Ἥνωσεν οὖν, καθὼς προέφαμεν, τὸν ἄνθρωπον
τῷ Θεῷ. Εἰ γὰρ μὴ ἄνθρωπος ἐνίκησεν τὸν ἀντίπαλον τοῦ ἀνθρώπου,
οὐκ ἂν δικαίως ἐνικήθη ὁ ἐχθρός. Πάλιν τε, εἰ μή ὁ Θεὸς
ἐδωρήσατο τὴν σωτηρίαν, οὐκ ἂν βεβαίως ἔσχομεν αὐτήν. Καὶ εἰ
μὴ συνηνώθη ὁ ἄνθρωπος τῷ Θεῷ, οὐκ ἂν ἠδυνήθη μετασχεῖν τῆς
ἀφθαρσίας. Ἔδει γὰρ τὸν μεσίτην Θεοῦ τε καὶ ἀνθρώπων, διὰ τῆς
ἰδίας πρὸς ἑκατέρους οἰκειότητος, εἰς φιλίαν καὶ ὁμόνοιαν τοὺς ἀμφοτέρους
συναγαγεῖν· καὶ Θεῷ μὲν παραστῆσαι τὸν ἄνθρωπον,
ἀνθρώποις δὲ γνωρίσαι τὸν Θεόν.</note>; he came in every dispensation,
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
and summed up all things in himself<note place='foot'>III. xvi. 6. Unus Christus Jesus Dominus noster, veniens
per universam dispositionem, et omnia in semetipsum recapitulans.</note>. He
was born about the forty-first year of the reign of
Augustus<note place='foot'>III. xxi. 3. Natus est enim Dominus noster circa primum et
quadragesimum annum Augusti imperii.</note>; when not full thirty he was baptized,
but he did not begin to teach till past forty<note place='foot'>II. xxii. 6. Responderunt ei: <q>Quinquaginta annos nondum
habes, et Abraham vidisti?</q> Hoc autem consequenter dicitur
ei, qui jam xl annos excessit, quinquagesimum autem annum
nondum attigit, non tamen multum a quinquagesimo anno absistat.
Ei autem, qui sit xxx annorum, diceretur utique: <q>Quadraginta
annorum nondum es.</q> Qui enim volebant eum mendacem
ostendere, non utique in multum extenderent annos ultra
ætatem, quam eum habere conspiciebant: sed proxima ætatis
dicebant, sive vere scientes ex conscriptione census, sive conjicientes
secundum ætatem, quam videbant habere eum super quadraginta;
sed ut non quæ esset triginta annorum. Irrationabile
est enim omnino, viginti annos mentiri eos, volentes eum juniorem
ostendere temporibus Abrahæ. Quod autem videbant, hoc
et loquebantur: qui autem videbatur, non erat putativus, sed
veritas. Non ergo multum aberat a quinquaginta annis.</note>. His
ministry extended through three passovers<note place='foot'>II. xxii. 3. Et primum quidem ut fecit vinum ex aqua in
Cana Galilææ, ascendit in diem festum paschæ ... et post
hæc iterum secunda vice ascendit in diem festum paschæ in Hierusalem,
quando paralyticum, qui juxta natatoriam jacebat
xxxviii annos, curavit.... Deinde, cum Lazarum suscitasset
ex mortuis, et insidiæ fierent a Pharisæis, secedit in Ephrem
civitatem; et inde <q>ante sex dies paschæ veniens in Bethaniam</q>
scribitur, et de Bethania ascendens in Hierosolymam, et manducans
pascha, et sequenti die passus.</note>, and
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
he suffered on the day of the passover<note place='foot'>IV. x. 1. Et non est numerum dicere in quibus a Moyse
ostenditur Filius Dei; cujus et diem passionis non ignoravit, sed
figuratim prænuntiavit eum, Pascha nominans: et in eadem ipsa,
quæ ante tantum temporis a Moyse prædicata est, passus est
Dominus adimplens Pascha.</note>. He is our
High Priest<note place='foot'>IV. viii. 2. Non enim solvebat sed adimplebat legem, summi
sacerdotis operam perficiens, propitians pro hominibus Deum,
et emundans leprosos, infirmos curans, et ipse moriens, uti
exsiliatus homo exiret de condemnatione, et reverteretur intrepide
ad suam hæreditatem.&mdash;The allusion is to that provision of
the Mosaic law by which those who had been living in the cities
of refuge, on the death of the High Priest returned to their
inheritance.</note>; he gave his soul for our souls, and
his flesh for ours <note place='foot'>V. i. 1. Τῷ ἰδίῳ οὖν αἵματι λυτρωσαμένου ἡμᾶς τοῦ Κυρίου,
καὶ δόντος τὴν ψυχὴν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἡμετέρων ψυχῶν, καὶ τὴν σάρκα τὴν
ἑαυτοῦ ἀντὶ τῶν ἡμετέρων σαρκῶν, κ.τ.λ.</note>; his righteous flesh has reconciled
to God our sinful flesh <note place='foot'>V. xiv. 2. <q>In corpore,</q> ait, <q>reconciliati carnis ejus:</q> hoc,
quoniam justa caro, reconciliavit eam carnem quæ in peccato
detinebatur, et in amicitiam adduxit Deo.</note>; and he brings us into union
and communion with God<note place='foot'>V. i. 1. Et effundente Spiritum Patris in adunitionem et
communionem Dei et hominis; ad homines quidem deponente
Deum per Spiritum, ad Deum autem rursus imponente hominem
per suam incarnationem, et firme et vere in adventu suo donante
nobis incorruptelam per communionem quæ est ad eum.</note>. He rose again in the
flesh<note place='foot'>V. vii. 1. Christus in carnis substantia surrexit.</note>, and in the flesh he ascended into heaven, and
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
will come again to judgment<note place='foot'>I. x. 1. supra, p. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>.&mdash;III. xvi. 8. Ἕνα καὶ αὐτὸν εἰδὼς
Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν, ᾧ ἠνοίχθησαν αἱ πύλαι τοῦ οὐρανοῦ διὰ τὴν ἔνσαρκον
ἀνάληψιν αὐτοῦ· ὃς καὶ ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ σαρκὶ, ἐν ᾗ καὶ ἔπαθεν,
ἐλεύσεται, τὴν δόξαν ἀποκαλύπτων τοῦ Πατρός.</note>; and he introduces
his Church into the kingdom of heaven<note place='foot'>IV. viii. 1.&mdash;&mdash;Deum, qui in regnum cœlorum introducit
Abraham et semen ejus, quod est Ecclesia, per Jesum Christum;
cui et adoptio redditur et hæreditas quæ Abrahæ promissa est.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Respecting the Holy Ghost, Irenæus declares that
he was with God before all created things<note place='foot'>IV. xx. 3. Et Sapientia, quæ est Spiritus, erat apud eum
ante omnem constitutionem.</note>, and (as
we have seen) that he was the Wisdom of God, whose
operation was the operation of God<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, note 2.</note>; that he is rightly
called Lord<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, note 8.</note>; and he affirms that the bread of eternal
life, which is the Word, is also the Spirit of the
Father<note place='foot'>IV. xxxviii. 1. Καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ὡς νηπίοις ὁ ἄρτος ὁ τέλειος τοῦ
Πατρὸς γάλα ἡμῖν ἑαυτὸν παρέσχεν, ὅπερ ἦν ἡ κατ᾽ ἄνθρωπον αὐτοῦ
παρουσία· ἵνα ὡς ὑπὸ μασθοῦ τῆς σαρκὸς αὐτοῦ τραφέντες, καὶ
διὰ τῆς τοιαύτης γαλακτουργίας ἐθισθέντες τρώγειν καὶ πίνειν τὸν
Λόγον τοῦ Θεοῦ, τὸν τῆς ἀθανασίας ἄρτον, ὅπερ ἐστὶ τὸ Πνεῦμα
τοῦ Πατρὸς, ἐν ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς κατασχεῖν δυνηθῶμεν.</note>. He speaks of him as coming with power to
give entrance unto life to all nations, and to open to
them the new Covenant, and as offering to the Father
on the day of Pentecost the first fruits of all nations<note place='foot'>III. xvii. 2. Quem et descendisse Lucas ait post ascensum
Domini super discipulos in Pentecoste, habentem potestatem
omnium gentium ad introitum vitæ et adapertionem novi testamenti:
unde et omnibus linguis conspirantes hymnum dicebant
Deo; Spiritu ad unitatem redigente distantes tribus, et primitias
omnium gentium offerente Patri.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<p>
He affirms that man, at his creation, had the
image of God in the flesh, the likeness in the soul
by the communication of the Divine Spirit<note place='foot'>V. vi. 1. Cum autem Spiritus hic commixtus animæ unitur
plasmati, propter effusionem Spiritus spiritualis et perfectus homo
factus est: et hic est qui secundum imaginem et similitudinem
factus est Dei. Si autem defuerit animæ spiritus, animalis vere
est, qui est talis, et carnalis derelictus imperfectus est; imaginem
quidem habens in plasmate, similitudinem vero non assumens per
Spiritum.</note>. He
implies that, since the fall, man has lost the Spirit,
and consequently the life of his soul; he asserts that
he remains carnal until he recovers the Spirit of
God<note place='foot'>V. vi. 1. supra.&mdash;viii. 2. Qui ergo pignus Spiritus habent, et
non concupiscentiis carnis serviunt, sed subjiciunt semetipsos
Spiritui, ac rationabiliter conversantur in omnibus, juste Apostolus
spirituales vocat, quoniam Spiritus Dei habitat in ipsis. Incorporales
autem spiritus non erunt homines spirituales; sed substantia
nostra, id est, animæ et carnis adunatio, assumens Spiritum
Dei, spiritualem hominem perficit. Eos autem qui abjiciunt
quidem Spiritus consilium, carnis autem voluntatibus serviunt,
... hos δικαίως ὁ Ἀπόστολος σαρκικοὺς καλεῖ.</note>, and then he becomes again a living soul, and
has in him the seed of eternal life<note place='foot'>V. ix. 2. Quotquot autem timent Deum, et credunt in adventum
Filii ejus, et per fidem constituunt in cordibus suis Spiritum
Dei, hi tales juste homines dicentur et mundi et spirituales
et viventes Deo; quia habent Spiritum Patris, qui emundat hominem
et sublevat in vitam Dei ... et ex utrisque factus est
vivens homo; vivens quidem propter participationem Spiritus,
homo autem propter substantiam carnis.</note>; that the Spirit
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
we receive here is a pledge of a fuller portion<note place='foot'>V. viii. 1. Nunc autem partem aliquam a spiritu ejus sumimus,
ad perfectionem et præparationem incorruptelæ; paulatim
assuescens capere et portare Deum: quod et pignus dixit Apostolus,
hoc est pars ejus honoris qui a Deo nobis promissus est....
Si igitur nunc pignus habentes, clamamus, <q>Abba,
Pater;</q> quid fiet quando resurgentes facie ad faciem videbimus
eum? ... Si enim pignus complectens hominem in semetipsum,
jam facit dicere, <q>Abba, Pater;</q> quid faciet universa
Spiritus gratia, quæ hominibus dabitur a Deo?</note>; and
that at the resurrection the souls and bodies of the
just will be quickened by the Spirit in union with
them, and their bodies become spiritual bodies<note place='foot'>V. vii. 2. Per Spiritum surgentia, fiunt corpora spiritualia,
uti per Spiritum semper permanentem habeant vitam.</note>, and
capable of immortality.
</p>

<p>
This is the substance of the doctrine of Irenæus
on the Trinity, and it will be seen that it is identical
with that of the Church of England, and that his
way of carrying it out throws light on important
passages of Holy Writ; and if there had been nothing
of interest to us in this Treatise beyond these
clear and direct testimonies to the belief of the
Church of that age on the fundamental doctrine of
the Gospel, we might well be glad that it was written
and handed down to our times.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The Origin of Evil.</head>

<p>
This being the subject out of which the Gnostic
theories appear to have arisen (there being so many
attempts to account for it, without in any wise bringing
it into connexion with the Supreme Being), it
might, perhaps, have been expected that Irenæus
should have endeavoured to throw some light upon
it. He has, however, taken a much wiser course.
He has altogether declined making it clear, and
thereby escaped the danger of inventing another
heresy.
</p>

<p>
He grants, indeed, that there is sufficient ground
for inquiring why God has allowed evil and imperfection
to exist; but he declares that all things were
intended by the Almighty to be created in the very
state and with the very qualities with which they
were created<note place='foot'>II. iv. 1. Causa igitur quærenda est hujusmodi dispositionis
Dei, sed non fabricatio mundi alteri adscribenda: et ante præparata
omnia dicenda sunt a Deo, ut fierent, quemadmodum et
facta sunt.&mdash;&mdash;2. Qui enim postea emendat labem, et velut maculam
emundat labem, multo prius poterat observare, ne initio in
suis fieri talem maculam.&mdash;&mdash;Et si ideo quod benignus sit, in
novissimis temporibus misertus est hominum, et perfectum eis
dat; illorum primo misereri debuit, qui fuerunt hominum factores
(he alludes to the Gnostic notion that man was made by inferior
beings) et dare eis perfectum. Sic utique et homines miserationem
percepissent, de perfectis perfecti facti.</note>. He will not allow that subsequent
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
dispensations were really intended to remedy the
imperfections of prior ones, because that would be
to accuse God himself of not understanding at first
the effects of his works<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2.</note>.
</p>

<p>
He asserts, moreover, that supposing angels and
men to have a proper voluntary agency, to be endued
with reason and the power of examining and deciding
upon examination, they must, in the very
nature of things, be capable of transgressing; and
that, indeed, otherwise excellence would not have
been either pleasant or an object of desire, because
they would not have known its value, neither would
it have been capable of reward, or of being enjoyed
when attained; nor would intercourse with God
have been valued, because it would have come without
any impulse, choice, care, or endeavour of their
own<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 6. Sed oportebat, inquit, eum neque Angelos
tales fecisse, ut possent transgredi, neque homines qui statim
ingrati exsisterent in eum; quoniam rationabiles, et examinatores,
et judiciales facti sunt, et non (quemadmodum irrationabilia, sive
inanimalia, quæ sua voluntate nihil possunt facere, sed cum necessitate
et vi ad bonum trahuntur, in quibus unus sensus, et
unus mos,) inflexibiles, et sine judicio, qui nihil aliud esse possunt,
præterquam quod facti sunt. Sic autem nec suave esset
eis quod est bonum, neque pretiosa communicatio Dei, neque
magnopere appetendum bonum, quod sine suo proprio motu et
cura et studio provenisset, sed ultro et otiose insitum: ita ut
essent nullius momenti boni, eo quod natura magis quam voluntate
tales exsisterent, et ultroneum haberent bonum, sed non
secundum electionem; et propter hoc nec hoc ipsum intelligentes,
quoniam pulchrum sit quod bonum, neque fruentes eo. Quæ
enim fruitio boni apud eos qui ignorant? Quæ autem gloria
his qui non studuerunt illud? Quæ autem corona his qui non
eam, ut victores in certamine, consequuti sunt?</note>. This is the only approach to a solution of
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
the difficulty which all the study of philosophers and
divines has ever discovered.
</p>

<p>
But when we come to inquire why some of God's
creatures transgressed, and some continued in obedience,
this, he says, is a mystery which God has
reserved to himself, and which it is presumption for us
to inquire into; and that we ought to consider what
it has pleased him to reveal as a favour, and leave to
him that which he has not thought proper to make
known<note place='foot'>II. xxviii. 7. Similiter autem et causam propter quam, cum
omnia a Deo facta sint, quædam quidem transgressa sunt, et abscesserunt
a Dei subjectione, quædam autem, immo plurima, perseveraverunt
et perseverant in subjectione ejus qui fecit; et cujus
naturæ sunt quæ transgressa sunt, cujus autem naturæ quæ perseverant;
cedere oportet Deo et Verbo ejus.&mdash;Ipsam autem causam
naturæ transgredientium neque Scriptura aliqua retulit, nec
apostolus dixit, nec Dominus docuit. Dimittere itaque oportet
agnitionem hanc Deo, quemadmodum et Dominus horæ et diei:
nec in tantum periclitari, uti Deo quidem concedamus nihil, et
hæc ex parte accipientes gratiam.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<p>
He notwithstanding suggests this practical good
arising out of the existence of evil, that the love of
God will be more earnestly cherished for ever by
those who have known by experience the evil of sin,
and have obtained their deliverance from it not
without their own exertion; and therefore that this
may be regarded as a reason why God permitted
evil<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 7. Bonus igitur agonista ad incorruptelæ agonem
adhortatur nos; uti coronemur, et pretiosam arbitremur
coronam; videlicet quæ per agonem nobis acquiritur, sed non
ultro coalitam. Et quanto per agonem nobis advenit, tanto est
pretiosior: quanto autem pretiosior, tanto eam semper diligamus.
Sed οὐχ ὁμοίως ἀγαπᾶται τὰ ἐκ τοῦ αὐτομάτου προσγινόμενα τοῖς
μετὰ ... σπουδῆς εὐρισκομένοις. Quoniam igitur pro nobis
erat plus diligere Deum, cum labore hoc nobis adinvenire Dominus
docuit et apostolus tradidit.&mdash;&mdash;Pro nobis igitur omnia hæc
sustinuit Dominus (i. e. he endured the existence of evil) uti per
omnia eruditi, in omnibus in futurum simus cauti et perseveremus
in omni ejus dilectione, rationabiliter edocti diligere Deum.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The sobriety of these views is so obvious, that it
appears unnecessary to dwell further upon them.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. The Evil Spirits.</head>

<p>
Although Irenæus does not think proper to discuss
the subject of the origin of evil, properly so called,
he speaks agreeably to the Scriptures as to its introduction
into this lower world, and in some degree
fills up their outline. Thus he describes Satan as
having been originally one of the angels who had
power over the air<note place='foot'>V. xxiv. 4. Sic etiam diabolus, cum sit unus ex angelis his,
qui super spiritum aëris præpositi sunt, quemadmodum Paulus
apostolus in ea quæ est ad Ephesios manifestavit, invidens
homini, apostata a divina factus est lege; invidia enim aliena est
a Deo. Et quoniam per hominem traducta est apostasia ejus, et
examinatio sententiæ ejus homo factus est, ad hoc magis magisque
semetipsum contrarium constituit homini, invidens vitæ ejus,
et in sua potestate apostatica volens concludere eum.</note>. He attributes the beginning
of his overt acts of rebellion to his envy towards
man<note place='foot'><p>IV. xl. 3. Ἐκ τότε γὰρ ἀποστάτης ὁ ἄγγελος αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐχθρὸς,
ἀφ᾽ ὅτε ἐζήλωσε τὸ πλάσμα τοῦ Θεοῦ, καὶ ἐχθροποιῆσαι αὐτὸ πρὸς
τὸν Θεὸν ἐπεχείρησε.&mdash;V. xxiv. 4. supra.
</p>
<p>
Tertullian, Cyprian, and Cyril of Jerusalem, were of the
same opinion. I subjoin the passages.&mdash;Tertullian <hi rend='italic'>de
Patientia</hi>, 5. Natales impatientiæ in ipso diabolo deprehendo, jam
tunc cum Dominum Deum universa opera quæ fecisset, imagini
suæ, id est, homini subjecisse impatienter tulit. Nec enim doluisset,
si sustinuisset; nec invidisset homini, si non doluisset.
Adeo decepit eum, quia inviderat.&mdash;&mdash;Cyprian, <hi rend='italic'>de Zelo et Livore</hi>,
p. 223, ed. Potter. Hinc diabolus inter initia statim mundi et
petit primus et perdidit. Ille dudum angelica majestate subnixus,
ille Deo acceptus et carus, postquam hominem ad imaginem
Dei factum conspexit, in zelum malevolo livore prorupit ...
stimulante livore homini gratiam datæ immortalitatis eripit.&mdash;&mdash;Cyril.
Hierosol. <hi rend='italic'>Catech.</hi> xii. 5. Ἀλλὰ τοῦτο τὸ μέγιστον τῶν
δημουργημάτων, ἐν παραδείσῳ χορεῦον, φθόνος ἐξέβαλε διαβολικός.</p></note>, because he had been made in the image of
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
God, i. e. immortal<note place='foot'>III. xxiii. 1. Si enim qui factus fuerat a Deo homo, ut
viveret, hic amittens vitam, læsus serpente qui depravaverat
eum, jam non reverteretur ad vitam, sed in totum projectus
esset morti; victus esset Deus, et superasset serpentis nequitia
voluntatem Dei. Sed quoniam Deus invictus et magnanimis
est, magnanimem quidem se exhibuit ad correptionem
hominis, et probationem omnium, quemadmodum prædiximus;
per secundum autem hominem alligavit fortem, et deripuit ejus
vasa, et evacuavit mortem, vivificans eum hominem, qui fuerat
mortificatus. Primum enim possessionis ejus vas Adam factus
est, quem et tenebat sub sua potestate, hoc est, prævaricationem
inique inferens ei, et per occasionem immortalitatis, mortificationem
faciens in eum.&mdash;&mdash;8. Et serpens nihil profecit, dissuadens
homini, nisi illud quod eum (i. e. se) transgressorem ostendit,
initium et materiam apostasiæ suæ habens hominem; Deum enim
non vicit.</note>; whom through envy he stirred
up to rebellion likewise<note place='foot'>V. xxiv. 4. supra.</note>, and that by falsehood<note place='foot'>V. xxiii. 1. Assuetus enim erat jam ad seductionem hominum
mentiri adversus Deum.... Ille mentiens adversus
Dominum tentavit hominem.</note>,
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
putting on the form of the serpent, that he might
escape the eye of God<note place='foot'>IV. Præf. 4. Et tunc quidem apostata angelus per serpentem
inobedientiam hominum operatus, existimavit latere se
Dominum.&mdash;&mdash;V. xxvi. 2. infra.</note>: wherefore, although God
had pity upon man, as having fallen through weakness<note place='foot'>IV. xl. 3. Διὸ καὶ ὁ Θεὸς τὸν μὲν παρ᾽ αὑτοῦ ἐπισπείραντα τὸ
ζιζάνιον, τουτέστι, τὴν παράβασιν εἰσενεγκόντα, ἀφώρισε τῆς ἰδίας
μετουσίας· τὸν δὲ ἀμελῶς μὲν ἀλλὰ κακῶς παραδεξάμενον τὴν
παρακοὴν ἄνθρωπον ἐλέησε. καὶ ἀντέστρεψε τὴν ἔχθραν, ἣν ἐχθροποίησε,
πρὸς τὸν αὐτὸν inimicitiarum auctorem.</note>,
and because otherwise Satan would have frustrated
the Divine purpose<note place='foot'>III. xxiii. 1. supra.</note>, he totally cut off from
himself the apostate angels<note place='foot'>IV. xl. 3.</note>, and doomed them and
their Prince to the eternal fire<note place='foot'>III. xxiii. 3. Non homini principaliter præparatus est æternus
ignis, sed ei qui seduxit et offendere fecit hominem, et, inquam,
qui princeps apostasiæ est, et his angelis qui apostatæ
factæ sunt cum eo: quem quidem juste percipient etiam hi, qui,
similiter ut illi, sine pœnitentia et sine regressu in malitiæ perseverant
operibus.</note>, which he had from
the beginning prepared for obstinate transgressors<note place='foot'>II. xxviii. 7. Quoniam præsciit Deus hoc futurum ...
ignem æternum his qui transgressuri sunt præparavit ab initio.&mdash;V.
xxvi. 2. Omnes qui falso dicuntur esse Gnostici organa
Satanæ ab omnibus Deum colentibus cognoscantur esse, per quos
Satanas nunc, et non ante, visus est maledicere Deo, qui ignem
æternum præparavit omni apostasiæ. Nam ipse per semetipsum
nude non audet blasphemare suum Dominum; quemadmodum
et initio per serpentem seduxit hominem, quasi latens Deum.
Καλῶς ὁ Ἰουστίνος ἔφη, ὅτι πρὸ μὲν τῆς τοῦ Κυρίου παρουσίας
οὐδέποτε ἐτόλμησεν ὁ Σατανᾶς βλασφημῆσαι τὸν Θεὸν, ἅτε μηδέπω
εἰδὼς αὑτοῦ τὴν κατάκρισιν· quoniam et in parabolis, et allegoriis,
a Prophetis de eo sic dictum est. Post autem adventum Domini
ex sermonibus Christi et Apostolorum ejus discens manifeste,
quoniam ignis æternus ei præparatus est ex sua voluntate abscedenti
a Deo, et omnibus qui sine pœnitentia perseverant in apostasia;
per hujusmodi homines blasphemat eum Deum, qui judicium
importat, quasi jam condemnatus, et peccatum suæ apostasiæ
Conditori suo imputat, et non suæ voluntati et sententiæ:
quemadmodum et qui supergrediuntur leges, et pœnas dant, queruntur
de legislatoribus, sed non de semetipsis. Sic autem et hi
diabolico spiritu pleni, innumeras accusationes inferunt Factori
nostro, qui et Spiritum vitæ nobis donaverit, et legem omnibus
aptam posuerit; et nolunt justum esse judicium Dei.</note>,
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
although he did not make known to them at that
time that their lot was irremediable<note place='foot'>V. xxvi. 2.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The next act of the apostate spirits was to mingle
themselves with human nature by carnal copulation
with women, and thus to cause the total corruption
of the old world and its inhabitants (notwithstanding
the preaching of Enoch to these fallen spirits),
and consequently their destruction<note place='foot'><p>IV. xxxvi. 4. Et temporibus Noë diluvium inducens, uti
extingueret pessimum genus eorum, qui tunc erant homines, qui
jam fructificare Deo non poterant, cum angeli transgressores commixti
fuissent eis.&mdash;&mdash;xvi. 2. Sed et Enoch sine circumcisione
placens Deo, cum esset homo, legatione ad angelos fungebatur, et
conservatur usque nunc testis justi judicii Dei: quoniam angeli
quidem transgressi deciderunt in terram in judicium, homo autem
placens translatus est in salutem.
</p>
<p>
The nature of the intercourse or commixture is not indeed
stated by Irenæus; but, as Feuardent and Grabe have pointed
out in commenting on these passages, he is evidently alluding to
the tradition spoken of more fully by Josephus, Justin Martyr,
Athenagoras, and Clement of Alexandria, whose words I subjoin.
</p>
<p>
Joseph. <hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> I. ii. 1. Πολλοὶ γὰρ ἄγγελοι Θεοῦ, γυναιξὶ συμμιγέντες,
ὑβριστὰς ἐγέννησαν παῖδας, καὶ παντὸς ὑπερόπτας καλοῦ,
διὰ τὴν ἐπὶ τῇ δυνάμει πεποίθησιν· ὅμοια γὰρ τοῖς ὑπο γιγάντων
τετολμῆσθαι λεγομένοις ὑφ᾽ Ἑλλήνων καὶ οὗτοι δράσαι παραδίδονται.
</p>
<p>
Justin M. <hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> II. 5. Ὁ Θεός ... τὴν μὲν τῶν ἀνθρώπων
καὶ τῶν ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανὸν πρόνοιαν ἀγγέλοις, οὓς ἐπὶ τούτοις ἔταξε,
παρέδωκεν. Οἱ δὲ ἄγγελοι, παραβάντες τήνδε τὴν τάξιν, γυναικῶν
μίξεσιν ἡττήθησαν, καὶ παῖδας ἐτέκνωσαν, οἱ εἰσιν οἱ λεγόμενοι
δαίμονες.
</p>
<p>
Athenag. <hi rend='italic'>Legat.</hi> 22. Οἱ δὲ (the fallen angels) ἐνύβρισαν καὶ τῆς
τῆς οὐσίας ὑποστάσει καῖ τῇ ἀρχῇ, οὗτός τε (Satan) ὁ τῆς ὕλης καὶ
τῶν ἐν αὐτῇ εἰδῶν ἄρχων καὶ ἕτεροι τῶν περὶ τὸ πρῶτον τοῦτο στερέωμα·
ἐκεῖνοι μὲν εἰς ἐπιθυμίαν πεσόντες παρθένων, καὶ ἥττους
σαρκὸς εὑρεθέντες, οὗτος δὲ ἀμελήσας καὶ πονηρὸς περὶ τὴν τῶν
πεπιστευμένων γενόμενος διοίκησιν. Ἐκ μὲν οὖν τῶν περὶ τὰς παρθένους
ἐχόντων οἱ καλούμενοι ἐγεννήθησαν γίγαντες.
</p>
<p>
Clem. Alex. <hi rend='italic'>Pædag.</hi> III. 2. § 14. Οἱ ἄγγελοι τοῦ Θεοῦ τὸ κάλλος
καταλελοιπότες διὰ κάλλος μαραινόμενον.&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> III. 7.
§ 59. Ἄγγελοί τινες ἀκρατεῖς γενόμενοι ἐπιθυμίᾳ ἁλόντες οὐρανόθεν
δεῦρο καταπεπτώκασιν.
</p>
<p>
The opinion contained in these quotations has been discountenanced
since the time of Cyril of Alexandria; but is it therefore
necessarily unfounded?</p></note>.
</p>

<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>

<p>
Irenæus makes none but very general allusions to
the agency of the fallen spirits from the fall of man
till the coming of Christ. He declares that, up to
that time<note place='foot'>V. xxvi. 2. supra.</note>, they had not ventured upon blaspheming
God; but that then, becoming aware that everlasting
fire was the appointed recompense of those who continued
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
in rebellion without repentance, they felt
themselves already condemned, and waxing desperate,
charged all the sin of their rebellion on their
Maker, by inspiring the Gnostics with their impious
tenets<note place='foot'>IV. Præf. 4. Nunc autem, quoniam novissima sunt tempora,
extenditur malum in homines, non solum apostatas eos faciens,
sed et blasphemos in Plasmatorem instituit multis machinationibus,
id est, per omnes hæreticos.</note>. It seems to be implied that sentence is
not yet pronounced upon the fallen angels<note place='foot'>See V. xxvi. 2. p. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, note 2.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. The Divine Dispensations.</head>

<p>
After the introduction of evil into creation, and the
agency by which it is propagated in the world, we
have next to notice the Divine plans for its counteraction
and removal; and as Irenæus was opposing
the Gnostic notion that the whole government of
the world, prior to the Gospel, was in the hands of
beings adverse to the Supreme Being, he was naturally
led to show that, on the contrary, the whole
history of mankind has been a series of dispensations
emanating from one and the same Supreme and only
God.
</p>

<p>
We have already<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>.</note> seen him stating that the whole
of these dispensations were planned from the beginning;
and he states them to have been carried into
execution by God the Son exhibiting himself to
mankind under four different aspects, figured by the
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
four faces of the cherubim; first to the Patriarchs,
in a kingly and divine character; secondly, under
the law, in a priestly and sacrificial aspect; thirdly,
at his nativity, as a man; fourthly, after his ascension,
by his Spirit<note place='foot'>III. xi. 8. Καὶ γὰρ τὰ Χερουβὶμ τετραπρόσωπα· καὶ τὰ πρόσωπα
αὐτῶν εἰκόνες τῆς πραγματείας τοῦ Υἱοῦ τοῦ Θεοῦ. Τὸ μὲν
γὰρ πρῶτον ζῶον, φησὶ, ὅμοιον λέοντι, τὸ ἔμπρακτον αὐτοῦ καὶ
ἡγεμονικὸν καὶ βασιλικὸν χαρακτηρίζον· τὸ δὲ δεύτερον ὅμοιον
μόσχῳ, τὴν ἱερουργικὴν καὶ ἱερατικὴν τάξιν ἐμφαῖνον· τὸ δὲ τρίτον
ἔχον πρόσωπον ἀνθρώπου, τὴν κατὰ ἄνθρωπον αὐτοῦ παρουσίαν
φανερώτατα διαγράφον· τὸ δὲ τέταρτον ὅμοιον ἀετῷ πετωμένῳ, τὴν
τοῦ Πνεύματος ἐπὶ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν ἐφιπταμένου δόσιν σαφηνίζον.&mdash;Καὶ
αὐτὸς δὲ ὁ Λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ τοῖς μὲν πρὸ Μωϋσέως πατριάρχαις,
κατὰ τὸ θεïκὸν καὶ ἔνδοξον ὡμίλει· τοῖς δὲ ἐν τῷ νόμῳ, ἱερατικὴν et
ministerialem τάξιν ἀπένεμεν· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἄνθρωπος γενόμενος,
τὴν δωρεὰν τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος εἰς πᾶσαν ἐξέπεμψε τὴν γῆν, σκεπάζων
ἡμᾶς ταῖς ἑαυτοῦ πτέρυξιν. Ὁποία οὖν ἡ πραγματεία τοῦ Υἱοῦ
τοῦ Θεοῦ, τοιαύτη καὶ τῶν ζώων ἡ μορφή· καὶ ὁποία ἡ τῶν ζώων
μορφὴ, τοιοῦτος καὶ ὁ χαρακτὴρ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου. Τετράμορφα γὰρ
τὰ ζῶα, τετράμορφον καὶ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, καὶ ἡ πραγματεία τοῦ Κυρίου.
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τέσσαρες ἐδόθησαν καθολικαὶ διαθῆκαι τῇ ἀνθρωπότητι·
μία μὲν τοῦ κατακλυσμοῦ τοῦ Νῶε, ἐπὶ τοῦ τόξου· δευτέρα
δὲ τοῦ Ἀβραὰμ, ἐπὶ τοῦ σημείου τῆς περιτομῆς· τρίτη δὲ ἡ νομοθεσία
ἐπὶ τοῦ Μωüσέως· τετάρτη δὲ ἡ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, διὰ τοῦ
Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Again, he represents God as having made four
covenants with mankind; one with Noah, of which
the rainbow was the sanction; a second with Abraham,
by circumcision; a third of the law, by Moses;
a fourth of the Gospel, by Christ<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>. At least this is
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
the enumeration made in the <hi rend='italic'>Questions and Answers</hi>
of Anastasius, and in the <hi rend='italic'>Theoria Rerum Ecclesiasticarum</hi>
of Germanus, where the Greek of Irenæus is
transcribed, and from which it was first published
by Grabe. But the old Latin version makes a different
enumeration, reckoning the first covenant before
the deluge with Adam, and the second after
that event with Noah<note place='foot'>Et propter hoc quatuor data sunt testamenta humano generi;
unum quidem ante cataclysmum sub Adam; secundum vero,
post cataclysmum sub Noë; tertium vero, legislatio sub Moyse;
quartum vero, quod renovat hominem, et recapitulat in se omnia,
quod est per Evangelium, elevans et pennigerans homines in
cœleste regnum.</note>.
</p>

<p>
He thinks that the knowledge of God was kept
up amongst the patriarchs by tradition from Adam,
and amongst the Jews by the prophets; whilst in
heathen nations the tradition has been lost, and men
are left to find it out by reason<note place='foot'>I. ix. 1. See p. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, note 1.</note>: that human governments
were providentially ordained to restrain the
ferocity and rapacity of mankind after they had given
up the fear of God<note place='foot'>V. xxiv. 2. Quoniam enim absistens a Deo homo in tantum
efferavit, ut etiam consanguineum hostem sibi putaret, et in omni
inquietudine et homicidio et avaritia sine timore versaretur, imposuit
illi Deus humanum timorem, (non enim cognoscebant
timorem Dei,) ut potestati hominum subjecti, et lege eorum adstricti,
ad aliquid assequantur justitiæ, et moderentur ad invicem,
in manifesto propositum gladium timentes.</note>; that the law of Moses was given
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
by way of discipline, to recover the Israelites back to
that sense of justice, and responsibility, and feeling
of love to God and man which they had lost<note place='foot'>IV. xiv. 2. Sic et Deus ab initio hominem quidem plasmavit
propter suam munificentiam; Patriarchas vero elegit propter illorum
salutem; populum vero præformabat, docens indocibilem,
sequi Deum; Prophetas vero præstruebat in terra, assuescens
hominem portare ejus Spiritum, et communionem habere cum
Deo: ipse quidem nullius indigens; his vero qui indigent ejus,
suam præbens communionem; et his qui ei complacebant, fabricationem
salutis, ut architectus, delineans, et non videntibus in
Ægypto a semetipso dans ducationem; et his qui inquieti erant
in eremo dans aptissimam legem, et his qui in bonam terram
introierunt, dignam præbens hæreditatem; et his qui convertuntur
ad Patrem, saginatum occidens vitulum, et primam
stolam donans; multis modis componens humanum genus ad consonantiam
salutis. Et propter hoc Joannes in Apocalypsi ait:
<q>Et vox ejus quasi vox aquarum multarum.</q> Vere enim aquæ
multæ Spiritus, quoniam dives, et quoniam magnus est Pater.
Et per omnes illos transiens Verbum, sine invidia utilitatem præstabat
eis qui subjecti sibi erant, omni conditioni congruentem et
aptam legem conscribens.&mdash;&mdash;xvi. 3. Cum autem hæc justitia
et dilectio, quæ erat erga Deum, cessit in oblivionem, et extincta
esset in Ægypto, necessario Deus propter multam suam erga
homines benevolentiam semetipsum ostendebat per vocem, et
eduxit de Ægypto populum in virtute, uti rursus fieret homo
discipulus et sectator Dei; et affligebat indictoaudientes, [dicto
non audientes, contumaces] ut non contemnerent eum qui se fecit;
et manna cibavit eum, uti rationalem acciperent escam, quemadmodum
et Moyses in Deuteronomio ait: <q>Et cibavit te manna,
quod non sciebant patres tui, uti cognoscas, quoniam non in pane
solo vivit homo, sed in omni verbo Dei, quod procedit de ore ejus,
vivit homo.</q> Et erga Deum dilectionem præcipiebat, et eam quæ
ad proximum est justitiam insinuabat, ut nec injustus, nec indignus
sit Deo; præstruens hominem per Decalogum in suam amicitiam,
et eam quæ circa proximum est concordiam; (quæ quidem
ipsi proderant homini;) nihil tamen indigente Deo ab homine.</note>; that
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
the prophets were inspired in order to accustom man
by degrees to bear God's Spirit and to have communion
with him<note place='foot'>IV. xiv. 2.</note>: and thus in various ways God prepared
mankind for salvation, providing for them laws
suited to their various states of preparation.
</p>

<p>
In opposing the notions of the Gnostics, Irenæus
had to defend the position that the Old Testament
is not contrary to the New; that they both emanated
from the same God acting differently under different
circumstances. The abolition of the law, he contended,
was no proof of a change of mind, but only of a change
of circumstances; the law being in its nature symbolical
and preparatory, when the Gospel, the reality and
the end, was revealed, the office of the law ceased<note place='foot'><p>This is the argument of the first twenty chapters of the fourth
book, and the quotations are too copious and diffuse to be given
at length. A few, therefore, must suffice.
</p>
<p>
IV. ii. 7. Non enim Lex prohibebat eos credere in Filium Dei,
sed et adhortabatur, dicens non aliter salvari homines ab antiqua
serpentis plaga, nisi credant in eum qui secundum similitudinem
carnis peccati in ligno martyrii exaltatur a terra, et omnia trahit
ad se, et vivificat mortuos.&mdash;He alludes to the brazen serpent
exhibited on a pole in the wilderness.
</p>
<p>
v. 4. In Abraham enim prædidicerat et assuetus fuerat homo
sequi Verbum Dei. Etenim Abraham secundum fidem suam
secutus præceptum Verbi Dei, προθύμως τὸν ἴδιον μονογενῆ καὶ
ἀγαπητὸν παραχωρήσας θυσίαν τῷ Θεῷ, ἵνα καὶ ὁ Θεὸς εὐδοκήσῃ
ὑπὲρ τοῦ σπέρματος αὐτοῦ πάντως τὸν ἴδιον μονογενῆ καὶ ἀγαπητὸν
Υἱὸν θυσίαν παρασχεῖν εἰς λύτρωσιν ἡμετέραν.&mdash;5. Propheta
ergo cum esset Abraham, et videret in Spiritu diem adventus
Domini, et passionis dispositionem, per quem ipse quoque, et
omnes qui, similiter ut ipse credidit, credunt Deo, salvari inciperent,
exsultavit vehementer.
</p>
<p>
ix. 1. Pater familias enim Dominus est, qui universæ domui
paternæ dominatur: et servis quidem et adhuc indisciplinatis
condignam tradens legem, liberis autem et fide justificatis congruentia
dans præcepta, et filiis adaperiens suam hæreditatem.&mdash;3.
Novo enim testamento cognito et prædicato per prophetas, et
ille qui illud dispositurus erat secundum placitum Patris prædicabatur;
manifestatus hominibus, quemadmodum voluit Deus,
ut possint semper proficere credentes in eum, et per testamenta
maturescere perfectum salutis. Una enim salus, et unus Deus;
quæ autem formant hominem præcepta multa, et non pauci gradus
qui ducunt hominem ad Deum.
</p>
<p>
xiii. 1. Et quia Dominus naturalia legis, per quæ homo justificatur,
quæ etiam ante legislationem custodiebant, qui fide justificabantur
et placebant Deo, non dissolvit, sed extendit et implevit;
ex sermonibus ejus ostenditur.... Hæc autem non quasi
contraria Legi docebat; sed adimplens Legem, et infigens justificationes
Legis in nobis. Illud autem fuisset Legi contrarium,
si quodcumque Lex vetasset fieri, idipsum discipulis suis jussisset
facere. Et hoc autem quod præcepit, non solum vetitis a
Lege, sed etiam a concupiscentiis eorum abstinere, non contrarium
est, quemadmodum diximus; neque solventis Legem, sed
adimplentis et extendentis et dilatantis.</p></note>.
</p>

<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>

<p>
He distinguishes, however, between what he calls
the <emph>natural</emph> portions of the law and the rest. As
<emph>they</emph> were kept by good men before the law<note place='foot'>IV. xiii. 1.</note>, so he
conceives them to be binding on us ever since<note place='foot'>IV. xiii. 4. Quia igitur naturalia omnia præcepta communia
sunt nobis et illis, in illis quidem initium et ortum habuerunt,
in nobis autem augmentum et adimpletionem perceperunt.</note>. It
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
is not at first sight clear what he means by that
term, but he expressly informs us that he comprises
in it the whole decalogue<note place='foot'>IV. xv. 1. Nam Deus primo quidem per naturalia præcepta,
quæ ab initio infixa dedit hominibus, admonens eos, id est, per
Decalogum (quæ si quis non fecerit, non habet salutem), nihil
plus ab eis exquisivit.</note>. And yet there is every
appearance that he would exclude the fourth commandment,
which he expressly asserts not to have
been observed before the giving of the law<note place='foot'>IV. xvi. 2. Et quia non per hæc justificabatur homo, sed in
signo data sunt populo, ostendit, quod ipse Abraham sine circumcisione,
et sine observatione sabbatorum, <q>credidit Deo, et reputatum
est illi ad justitiam, et amicus Dei vocatus est.</q> Sed et
Lot sine circumcisione eductus est de Sodomis, percipiens salutem
a Deo. Item Deo placens Noë cum esset incircumcisus, accepit
mensuras mundi secundæ generationis. Sed et Enoch sine circumcisione
placens Deo, cum esset homo, legatione ad Angelos
fungebatur, et translatus est, et conservatur usque nunc testis
justi judicii Dei: quoniam Angeli quidem transgressi deciderunt
in terram in judicium; homo autem placens, translatus est in
salutem. Sed et reliqua autem omnis multitudo eorum, qui ante
Abraham fuerunt justi, et eorum Patriarcharum, qui ante Moysem
fuerunt, et sine his quæ prædicta sunt, et sine lege Moysi justificabantur.</note>.
</p>

<p>
But although the precepts of the moral law are
equally <emph>binding</emph> at all times, he thought that they
were not formally <emph>given</emph> to the just men of old, because
they observed them voluntarily, being a law
unto themselves<note place='foot'>IV. xiii. 1. supra.&mdash;xvi. 3. Quare igitur patribus non disposuit
Dominus testamentum? Quia lex non est posita justis; justi
autem patres, virtutem decalogi conscriptam habentes in cordibus
et animabus suis, diligentes scilicet Deum qui fecit eos, et abstinentes
erga proximum ab injustitia: propter quod non fuit necesse
admoneri eos correptoriis literis, quia habebant in semetipsis
justitiam legis.</note>. But when God's people forgot
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
them in the land of Egypt, then it became necessary
distinctly to enact them, to prepare man for the
fuller duties of love to God and goodwill to man<note place='foot'>IV. xvi. 3.</note>.
And when they did not obey the moral law, he
added to it the ceremonial<note place='foot'>IV. xv. 1. At ubi conversi sunt in vituli factionem, et reversi
sunt animis suis in Ægyptum, servi pro liberis concupiscentes
esse, aptam concupiscentiæ suæ acceperunt reliquam servitutem,
a Deo quidem non abscindentem, in servitutis autem jugo dominantem
eis.</note>, that, by types, their servile
and childish natures might be trained up to the
apprehension of realities; by temporal things, of eternal;
by carnal, of spiritual; by earthly, of heavenly<note place='foot'>IV. xiv. 3. Sic autem et populo Tabernaculi factionem, et
ædificationem Templi, et Levitarum electionem, sacrificia quoque
et oblationes, et monitiones, et reliquam omnem Lege statuebat
deservitionem. Ipse quidem nullius horum est indigens; est
enim semper plenus omnibus bonis, omnemque odorem suavitatis,
et omnes suaveolentium vaporationes habens in se, etiam antequam
Moyses esset: facile autem ad idola revertentem populum
erudiebat, per multas vocationes præstruens eos perseverare, et
servire Deo: per ea quæ erant secunda, ad prima vocans, hoc est,
per typica, ad vera; et per temporalia, ad æterna; et per carnalia,
ad spiritalia; et per terrena, ad cœlestia.</note>.
Some of their ordinances had a twofold use; as circumcision
was intended, equally with their rites and
ceremonies, to keep them distinct from the heathen,
and also to signify the circumcision of the soul<note place='foot'>IV. xvi. 1. Quoniam autem et circumcisionem non quasi
consummatricem justitiæ, sed in signo eam dedit Deus, ut cognoscibile
perseveret genus Abrahæ, ex ipsa Scriptura discimus....
In signo ergo data sunt hæc: non autem sine symbolo erant
signa, id est, sine argumento, neque otiosa, tanquam quæ a sapiente
Artifice darentur; sed secundum carnem circumcisio circumcisionem
significabat spiritalem.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>

<p>
To show that the moral law was preparatory to
the Gospel, he alleges the fact that Jesus taught its
precepts as the way of life to the young lawyer who
came to inquire of him; not supposing that these
were sufficient in themselves, but that they were
steps to the knowledge of Christ<note place='foot'>IV. xii. 5. Quoniam autem Lex prædocuit hominem sequi
oportere Christum, ipse facit manifestum, ei qui interrogavit eum,
quid faciens vitam æternam hæreditaret, sic respondens: <q>Si vis
in vitam introire, custodi præcepta.</q> Illo autem interrogante,
<q>Quæ?</q> rursus Dominus: <q>Non mœchaberis, non occides, non
furaberis, non falsum testimonium reddes, honora patrem et matrem,
et diliges proximum tanquam teipsum;</q> velut gradus proponens
præcepta Legis introitus in vitam, volentibus sequi eum:
quæ uni tum dicens, omnibus dicebat.</note>.
</p>

<p>
He, however, thought that our Lord wished that
the whole ceremonial law should be observed as long
as Jerusalem stood<note place='foot'>IV. xii. 4. Non ergo eam Legem, quæ est per Moysem data,
incusabat, quam adhuc salvis Hierosolymis suadebat fieri.</note>.
</p>

<p>
But although he appears to think that the law,
as a whole and in the letter, is no longer binding to
Christians, he does not think that this leaves us at
liberty to do as we like. If we are not tied down
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
to the letter, like slaves, that is because it was intended
that the law of liberty should be of wider
range, and our obedience extend itself beyond the
letter, and that our subjection to our Heavenly King
should be more hearty and thoroughgoing than ever;
and therefore, if we wish to remain in the way of
salvation through Christ, we must voluntarily adopt
the precepts of the decalogue, and, giving them a
completer meaning, endeavour to realize in our conduct
all the fulness of their enlarged application<note place='foot'>IV. xiii. 2. Etenim Lex, quippe servis posita, per ea quæ
foris erant corporalia, animam erudiebat, velut per vinculum attrahens
eam ad obedientiam præceptorum, uti disceret homo servire
Deo: Verbum autem liberans animam, et per ipsam corpus
voluntarie emundari docuit. Quo facto, necesse fuit auferri quidem
vincula servitutis, quibus jam homo assueverat, et sine vinculis
sequi Deum; superextendi vero decreta libertatis, et augeri
subjectionem quæ est ad regem, ut non retrorsus quis revertens,
indignus appareat ei qui se liberavit: eam vero pietatem et obedientiam,
quæ est erga patremfamilias, esse quidem eandem et
servis et liberis; majorem autem fiduciam habere liberos, quoniam
sit major et gloriosior operatio libertatis, quam ea quæ est in
servitute obsequentia.&mdash;3. Hæc autem, quemadmodum prædiximus,
non dissolventis erant Legem, sed adimplentis, et extendentis
in nobis: tamquam si aliquis dicat, majorem libertatis
operationem, et pleniorem erga Liberatorem nostrum infixam nobis
subjectionem et affectionem. Non enim propter hoc liberavit
nos, ut ab eo abscedamus; nec enim potest quisquam extra dominica
constitutus bona, sibimetipsi acquirere salutis alimenta:
sed ut plus gratiam ejus adepti, plus eum diligamus. Quanto
autem plus eum dilexerimus, hoc majorem ab eo gloriam accipiemus,
cum simus semper in conspectu Patris.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>

<p>
It is almost unnecessary to point out the exact
agreement of these sentiments with the seventh and
fourteenth articles of the Church of England, and
how impossible it must be for a person holding them
to think that we can do any thing whatever beyond
what Christ has a right to expect from us. It is
manifest that he would not have thought that any
degrees of Christian holiness are really at our option,
whether we shall seek them or not; but that every
person who, having any degree of perfection, or any
means of advancement placed before him, knowingly
neglects it, becomes thereby unworthy of him who
has given him liberty<note place='foot'>IV. xiii. 2.</note>, and hazards his salvation:
in short, that <q>to whom much is given, of him will
much be required.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. On The Canon, Genuineness, Versions, Use, And
Value Of Holy Scripture.</head>

<p>
Unnatural as it may appear, it is notwithstanding
true that we find much less clear ideas in regard to
the <emph>canon</emph> of Holy Scripture in the earlier ages than
in the later. The word scripture was used, as we
shall see, in a latitude with which no church or party
in later times has used it.
</p>

<p>
Irenæus quotes all the books which we of the
Church of England esteem canonical, except Ruth,
Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Ecclesiastes,
Canticles, Obadiah, Nahum, Zephaniah, and Haggai.
But the mere circumstance of his not citing
them cannot, of course, imply any doubt as to their
inspiration or canonicity. He had no occasion to
do so for the purposes of his argument. It is only
wonderful that he thought himself obliged to quote
so largely upon such a subject.
</p>

<p>
But besides the writings which we esteem canonical,
he quotes others which we reject from the
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
canon. He not only repeats sentiments from them,
as when he introduces a sentiment which occurs in
the book of Wisdom<note place='foot'>IV. xxxviii. 3. Ἀφθαρσία δὲ ἐγγὺς εἶναι ποιεῖ Θεοῦ. Quoted
from Wisdom vi. 19, 20.</note>, or the story of Susanna<note place='foot'>IV. xxi. 2. Deus&mdash;&mdash;qui est absconsorum cognitor. Quoted
from Daniel xiii. 42. in the Septuagint version.</note>,
without, however, mentioning the books themselves;
he also quotes the story of Bel and the Dragon<note place='foot'>IV. v. 2. Quem et Daniel propheta, cum dixisset ei Cyrus
rex Persarum, <q>Quare non adoras Bel?</q> annunciavit, dicens,
<q>Quoniam non colo idola manufacta, sed vivum Deum, qui constituit
cœlum et terram, et habet omnis carnis dominationem.</q></note>
as truly relating the words of the prophet Daniel,
and the book of Baruch<note place='foot'>V. xxxv. 1. Et quotquot ex credentibus ad hoc præparavit
Deus ad derelictos multiplicandos in terra, et sub regno sanctorum
fieri, et ministrare huic Hierusalem, et regnum in ea, significavit
Jeremias propheta; <q>Circumspice,</q> dicens, &amp;c.: and then he
quotes a passage from the book of Baruch, extending from ch.
iv. 36. to the end of ch. v.</note> as truly recording those
of Jeremiah, and uses the latter as inspired. In
short, Irenæus quoted from the Septuagint version
of the Scriptures; and he consequently read
the stories of Susanna, and Bel and the Dragon, as
part of the book of Daniel, and the book of Baruch
as a continuation of that of Jeremiah. There is, in
fact, great reason to think that he believed in the
inspiration (in some sense) of the whole of the books
contained in that version. But if so, that does not
<emph>prove</emph> (as we shall see presently), that they were all
esteemed by the Church as canonical.
</p>

<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>

<p>
But then there is a circumstance which must prevent
the Church of Rome from appealing to him
with success in support of the canonicity of any of
the books of the Apocrypha; and that is, that he
quotes, under the express name of Scripture, a work
which the whole Church, from not long after his
time, has agreed to regard as merely human, if not
altogether spurious&mdash;I mean the <hi rend='italic'>Shepherd</hi> of Hermas<note place='foot'>IV. xx. 2. Καλῶς οὖν εἶπεν ἡ γραφὴ, ἡ λέγουσα· Πρῶτον
πάντων πίστευσον, ὅτι εἷς ἔστιν ὁ Θεὸς, ὁ τὰ πάντα κτίσας καὶ
καταρτίσας, καὶ ποιήσας ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος εἰς τὸ εἶναι τὰ πάντα.
This is quoted from the <emph>first commandment</emph> in the abovementioned
work.</note>.
It is true that he is not singular in so speaking;
for Clement of Alexandria directly ascribes inspiration
to Hermas<note place='foot'>Strom. I. xxix. § 181. Θείως τοίνυν ἡ δύναμις ἡ τῷ Ἑρμᾷ
κατ᾽ ἀποκάλυψιν λαλοῦσα.</note>. And yet Tertullian, who was
contemporary with Clement, affirms<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Pudicitia</hi>, 10. Sed cederem tibi, si scriptura <hi rend='italic'>Pastoris</hi>, quæ
sola mœchos amat, divino instrumento meruisset incidi; si non
ab omni concilio ecclesiarum etiam vestrarum (he is addressing
the Bishop of Rome) inter apocrypha et falsa judicaretur.</note> that the Italian
Churches had in express councils declared his book
apocryphal.
</p>

<p>
I argue thus on the supposition that his single
authority is appealed to. If he is adduced, with
other writers of his age, to show that the Church
acknowledged the apocryphal books as canonical,
then one reply is, that even if this were true of the
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
Church of that age, we are not bound by the decision
of a single age. Massuet, indeed<note place='foot'>Dissert. III. § 4.</note>, reasons as
though the canonicity of the books the Church of
Rome receives were established by the authority of
<q>all churches, or at least the greater part of them,
and those of distinguished rank.</q> Now it so happens
that we have quite a chain of evidence on the
opposite side. Melito<note place='foot'>Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> IV. xxvi. 6. <q>Ἀκριβῶς μαθὼν τὰ τῆς παλαιᾶς
διαθήκης βιβλία, ὑποτάξας ἔπεμψά σοι. ὧν ἐστι τὰ ὀνόματα·
Μωüσέως πέντε· Γένεσις, Ἔξοδος, Λευïτικὸν, Ἀριθμοὶ, Δευτερονόμιον·
Ἰησοῦς Ναυῆ, Κριταὶ, Ῥούθ· Βασιλειῶν τέσσαρα, Παραλειπομένων
δύο· Ψαλμῶν Δαβὶδ, Σολομῶνος Παροιμίαι (ἣ καὶ Σοφία),
Ἐκκλησιαστὴς, Ἆσμα ᾀσμάτων, Ἰώβ· προφητῶν, Ἡσαΐου, Ἱερεμίου·
τῶν δώδεκα ἐν μονοβίβλω· Δανιὴλ, Ἰεζεκιὴλ, Ἔσδρας.</q></note>, contemporary with Irenæus,
after diligent inquiry in Palestine, reckons up, as
canonical, the same books of the Old Testament
which we acknowledge, and no others: for the Σοφία<note place='foot'>Some copies, instead of ἣ καὶ Σοφία, read ἡ Σοφία.</note>,
which (according to one reading) comes in after
the Proverbs, is merely another name for that book;
and Ezra, it is well known, included Nehemiah and
Esther. Origen<note place='foot'><p>Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> VI. xxv. 1. Τὸν μέντοιγε πρῶτον ἐξηγούμενοσ
ψαλμὸν, ἔκθεσιν πεποίηται τοῦ τῶν ἱερῶν γραφῶν τῆς παλαιᾶς διαθήκης
καταλόγου, ὦδέ πως γραφῶν κατὰ λέξιν· Οὐκ ἀγνοητέον δ᾽ εἶναι
τὰς ἐνδιαθήκους βίβλους, ὡς Ἑβραῖοι παραδιδόασιν, δύο καὶ εἴκοσι·
... ἡ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν Γένεσις ἐπιγεγραμμένη, ... Ἔξοδος,
Λευïτικὸν, ... Ἀριθμοὶ, Δευτερονόμιον ... Ἰησοῦς υἱὸς Ναυῆ,
... Κριταὶ, Ῥοὺθ, παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἐν ἑνὶ, ... Βασιλειῶν πρώτη,
δευτέρα, παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἓν, Σαμουὴλ, ... 2. Βασιλειῶν τρίτη,
τετάρτη, ἐν ἑνὶ, ... Παραλειπομένων πρώτη, δευτέρα, ἐν ἑνὶ,
... Ἔσδρας πρῶτος καὶ δευτέρος, ἐν ἑνὶ Ἐζρᾶ, ... βίβλος
Ψαλμῶν, ... Σολομῶντος παροιμίαι, ... Ἐκκλησιαστὴς,
... Ἆσμα ᾀσμάτων, ... ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ τῶν ιβʹ προφητῶν ἕν
ἐστιν.... Ἡσαïας, ... Ἱερεμίας σὺν Θρήνοις καὶ τῇ ἐπιστολῇ,
ἐν ἑνὶ, ... Δανιὴλ, ... Ἱεζεκιὴλ, ... Ἰὼβ, ...
Ἐσθὴρ, ... Ἔξω δὲ τούτων ἐστὶ τὰ Μακκαβαïκά.
</p>
<p>
Here we have Origen distinctly recognizing the Hebrew canon
as the true one, only making a mistake in the matter of fact, that
the apocryphal epistle of Jeremiah belonged to the Hebrew book.</p></note>, in the middle of the third century,
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
and Athanasius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Opera</hi>, tom. ii. pp. 126-204.</note>, Epiphanius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Pond. et Mens.</hi> tom. ii. ed. Colon. p. 162. § 4, 5. <hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi>
xxix. § 7.</note>, Gregory of Nazianzum<note place='foot'>Quoted in Beveridge on the Sixth Article of the Church of
England, in his <hi rend='italic'>Exposition of the Articles</hi>.</note>,
and Jerome<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prolog. Galeat.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Epist. ad Paulinum</hi>.</note>, successively in the fourth&mdash;and
what is more, the council of Laodicea<note place='foot'>Can. 60.</note>, in the
third century, whose acts were recognised by the
sixth synod of Constantinople and Pope Adrian<note place='foot'>See Beveridge, as above cited.</note>&mdash;all
agree in receiving a canon of the Old Testament
much more like ours than like that of Rome. It is
true that Origen adds the Maccabees, but he states
that they are not in the canon. Athanasius, Epiphanius,
and the Council of Laodicea reckon Baruch
as part of the book of Jeremiah; Athanasius and
the Council add the epistle of Jeremiah; Athanasius
alone reckons Susanna and Bel and the Dragon.
On the other hand, they all, together with Gregory
of Nazianzum, Jerome, and Ruffinus, who entirely
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
agree with us, reject all the other books which the
Church of Rome has since admitted into the canon.
Epiphanius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> 29.</note> says that Christians and Nazoræi
agreed in receiving the Jewish books, so that he
could not have been aware that the Jews did not
admit Baruch. So that how many soever may agree
in <emph>quoting</emph> the apocryphal books, the weight of authority
is clearly against their reception as <emph>canonical</emph>.
</p>

<p>
From all that has been said, it must be clear
that we can make but little use of Irenæus in settling
the <emph>canon</emph> of Scripture. But from the number
of books and of passages which he has quoted, he
is of great value in establishing the <emph>genuineness</emph> of
our present copies; all the passages bearing as near
a resemblance to the corresponding parts of our
MSS. as can be expected from a writer who evidently
quotes from memory.
</p>

<p>
He likewise bears direct testimony to the <emph>authenticity</emph>
of the four Gospels and the Revelation of St.
John; affirming that St. Matthew wrote his in Hebrew
for the use of the Jews, at the time when St.
Peter and St. Paul conjointly were preaching and
establishing the Church at Rome<note place='foot'>III. i. 1. Ὁ μὲν δὴ Ματθαιος ἐν τοῖς Ἑβραίοις τῇ ἰδίᾳ διαλέκτῳ
αὐτῶν καὶ γραφὴν ἐξήνεγκεν εὐαγγελίου, τοῦ Πέτρου καὶ
τοῦ Παύλου ἐν Ῥώμη εὐαγγελιζομένων, καὶ θεμελιούντων τὴν ἐκκλησίαν.
μετὰ δὲ τὴν τούτων ἔξοδον Μάρκος, ὁ μαθητὴς καὶ ἑρμηνευτὴς
Πέτρου, καὶ αὐτὸς τὰ ὑπὸ Πέτρου κηρυσσόμενα ἐγγράφως
ἡμῖν παραδέδωκε. καὶ Λουκᾶς δὲ ὁ ἀκόλουθος Παύλου, τὸ ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνου
κηρυσσόμενον εὐαγγέλιον ἐν βιβλίῳ κατέθετο. ἔπειτα Ἰωάννης
ὁ μαθητὴς τοῦ Κυρίου, ὁ καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ στῆθος αὐτοῦ ἀναπεσὼν, καὶ
αὐτὸς ἐξέδωκε τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, ἐν Ἐφέσῳ τῆς Ἀσίας διατρίβων.&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Frag.</hi>
29. Τὸ κατὰ Ματθαῖον εὐαγγέλιον πρὸς Ἰουδαίους ἐγάαφη·
οὗτοι γὰρ ἐπεθύμουν πάνυ σφόδρα ἐκ σπέρματος Δαβὶδ Χριστὸν. ὁ
δὲ Ματθαῖος, καὶ ἔτι μᾶλλον σφοδροτέραν ἔχων τὴν τοιαύτην ἐπιθυμίαν,
παντοίως ἔσπευδε πληροφορίαν παρέχειν αὐτοῖς, ὡς εἴη ἐκ
σπέρματος Δαβὶδ ὁ Χριστός· διὸ καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς γενέσεως αὐτοῦ
ἤρξατο.</note>; that after their
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
departure, St. Mark committed to writing what he
had heard from St. Peter, and St. Luke what he had
heard from St. Paul<note place='foot'>III. i. 1. supra.</note>; that St. John wrote his Gospel
at Ephesus, to oppose the errors of Cerinthus<note place='foot'>Ibid.&mdash;xi. 1. Hanc fidem annuntians Joannes Domini discipulus,
volens per evangelii annuntiationem auferre cum qui a Cerintho
inseminatus erat hominibus errorem, et multo prius ab his
qui dicuntur Nicolaïtæ, qui sunt vulsio ejus quæ falso cognominatur
scientiæ, ... omnia igitur talia circumscribere volens
discipulus Domini, et regulam veritatis constituere in ecclesia, ...
sic inchoavit in ea quæ est secundum evangelium doctrina:
<q>In principio erat Verbum,</q> &amp;c.</note>,
and that he was likewise the author of the Revelation
which bears his name<note place='foot'>V. xxvi. 1. Manifestius adhuc etiam de novissimo tempore
... significavit Joannes Domini discipulus in Apocalypsi.</note>, the visions of which he
saw towards the close of the reign of Domitian<note place='foot'>V. xxx. 3. Ἡμεῖς οὖν οὐκ ἀποκινδυνεύομεν περὶ τοῦ ὀνόματος
τοῦ Ἀντιχρίστου, ἀποφαινόμενοι βεβαιωτικῶς. Εἰ γὰρ ἔδει ἀναφανδὸν
τῷ νῦν καιρῷ κηρύττεσθαι τοὔνομα αὐτοῦ, δι᾽ ἐκείνου ἂν
ἐρῥ'eθη τοῦ καὶ τὴν Ἀποκάλυψιν ἑωρακότος. οὐδὲ γὰρ πρὸ πολλοῦ
χρόνου ἑωράθη, ἀλλὰ σχεδὸν ἐπὶ τῆς ἡμετέρας γενεᾶς, πρὸς τῷ
τέλει τῆς Δομετιανοῦ ἀρχῆς.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<p>
It is curious that Irenæus quotes a passage as
written either by Isaiah or Jeremiah, which does not
appear in our present copies<note place='foot'>III. xx. 4. Et quoniam non solum homo erat, qui moriebatur
pro nobis, Esaias ait: <q>Et commemoratus est Dominus sanctus
Israël mortuorum suorum, qui dormierant in terra sepultionis;
et descendit ad eos evangelizare salutem quæ est ab eo, ut salvaret
eos.</q> At IV. xxxiii. 1. he ascribes it to Jeremiah, as does
Justin Martyr, (<hi rend='italic'>Dial. cum Tryph.</hi> 72.) who gives it in Greek.
In IV. xxxiii. 12. and V. xxxi. 1. he quotes it without mentioning
the author.</note>. Justin Martyr had
quoted it before him, and asserted that it had been
wilfully erased by the Jews from the Hebrew copies<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Tryph.</hi> 72.</note>.
Now, however, it does not appear even in the Septuagint.
He likewise records a saying or two as our
Lord's which do not appear in the New Testament<note place='foot'>II. xxxiv. 3. Et ideo Dominus dicebat ingratis exsistentibus
in eum: <q>Si in modico fideles non fuistis, quod magnum est
quis dabit vobis?</q> The same passage is quoted by S. Clement
of Rome, <hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> II. 8. Λέγει γὰρ Κύριος ἐν τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ· Εἰ
τὸ μικρὸν οὐκ ἐτηρήσατε, τὸ μέγα τίς ὑμῖν δώσει;&mdash;&mdash;V. xxxiii. 3.
Quemadmodum Presbyteri meminerunt, qui Joannem discipulum
Domini viderunt, audisse se ab eo, quemadmodum de temporibus
illis docebat Dominus, et dicebat: <q>Venient dies, in quibus
vinæ nascentur, singulæ decem millia palmitum habentes, et in
una palmite dena millia brachiorum, et in uno vero palmite dena
millia flagellorum, et in unoquoque flagello dena millia botruum,
et in unoquoque botro dena millia acinorum, et unumquodque
acinum expressum dabit vigintiquinque metretas vini. Et cum
eorum apprehenderit aliquis sanctorum botrum, alius clamabit:
Botrus ego melior sum; me sume; per me Dominum benedic.</q>
Similiter et granum tritici decem millia spicarum generaturum,
et unamquamque spicam habituram decem millia granorum, et
unumquodque granum quinque bilibres similæ claræ mundæ:
et reliqua autem poma, et semina, et herbam secundum congruentiam
iis consequentem: et omnia animalia iis cibis utentia,
quæ a terra accipiuntur, pacifica et consentanea invicem fieri,
subjecta hominibus cum omni subjectione.&mdash;4. Ταῦτα δὲ καὶ
Παπίας Ἰωάννου μὲν ἀκουστὴς, Πολυκάρπου δὲ ἑταῖρος γεγονὼς,
ἀρχαῖος ἀνὴρ, ἐγγράφως ἐπιμαρτυρεῖ ἐν τῇ τετάρτη τῶν αὐτοῦ
βιβλίων. ἔστι γὰρ αὐτῷ πέντε βιβλὶα συντεταγμένα. Et adjecit,
dicens: <q>Hæc autem credibilia sunt credentibus.</q> Et <q>Juda,</q>
inquit, <q>proditore non credente, et interrogante: Quomodo ergo
tales genituræ a Domino perficientur?</q> dixisse Dominum:
<q>Videbunt qui venient in illa.</q></note>:
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
the latter of which indeed few persons will believe
to have been spoken by our Lord.
</p>

<p>
He informs us that the Ebionites use only St.
Matthew's Gospel, and reject St. Paul<note place='foot'>III. xi. 7. Ebionei etenim eo Evangelio, quod est secundum
Matthæum, solo utentes, ex illo ipso convincuntur, non recte
præsumentes de Domino. Marcion autem id quod est secundum
Lucam circumcidens, ex his quæ adhuc servantur penes eum,
blasphemus in solum exsistentem Deum ostenditur. Qui autem
Jesum separant a Christo, et impassibilem perseverasse Christum,
passum vero Jesum dicunt, id quod secundum Marcum est præferentes
Evangelium, cum amore veritatis legentes illud, corrigi
possunt. Hi autem qui a Valentino sunt, eo quod est secundum
Joannem plenissime utentes, ad ostensionem conjugationum suarum.&mdash;&mdash;xv.
1. Eadem etiam dicimus iterum et his qui Paulum
apostolum non cognoscunt.... Neque enim contendere possunt
Paulum non esse apostolum.</note>; that Marcion
curtailed St. Luke, and in effect the whole Gospel<note place='foot'>III. xi. 7.-9. Etenim Marcion totum rejiciens Evangelium,
immo vere seipsum abscindens ab Evangelio, pariter gloriatur se
habere Evangelium. Alii vero ut donum Spiritus frustrentur,
quod in novissimis temporibus secundum placitum Patris effusum
est in humanum genus, illam speciem non admittunt, quæ est
secundum Joannis Evangelium, in qua Paracletum se missurum
Dominus promisit; sed simul et Evangelium, et propheticum
repellunt Spiritum. Infelices vere, qui pseudo-prophetæ quidem
esse volunt, propheticam vero gratiam repellunt ab Ecclesia:
similia patientes his, qui propter eos qui in hypocrisi veniunt,
etiam a fratrum communicatione se abstinent.</note>;
that Cerinthus used St. Mark, and the Valentinians
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
St. John<note place='foot'>III. xi. 7.</note>, and invented a Gospel of their
own; and that the Montanists reject St. John's Gospel
and St. Paul<note place='foot'>III. xi. 9.</note>. It appears, however, that the
Gnostics did in fact quote, at least when arguing
with Christians, the self-same books which we now
have; for all the passages of Scripture which Irenæus
brings forward as perverted by them correspond with
our present copies.
</p>

<p>
Irenæus was of opinion that the whole of the
sacred books of the Old Testament were lost during
the Babylonish captivity, and that Ezra restored
them by divine inspiration<note place='foot'>III. xxi. 2. Πρὸ γὰρ τοὺς Ῥωμαίους κρατύναι τὴν ἀρχὴν αὐτῶν,
ἔτι τῶν Μακεδόνων τὴν Ἀσίαν κατεχόντων, Πτολεμαῖος ὁ
Λάγου, φιλοτιμούμενος τὴν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ κατεσκευασμένην βιβλιοθήκην
ἐν Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ κοσμῆσαι τοῖς πάντων ἀνθρώπων συγγράμμασιν,
ὅσα γε σπουδαῖα ὑπῆρχεν, ᾐτήσατο παρὰ τῶν Ἱεροσολυμιτῶν εἰς
τὴν Ἐλληνικὴν διάλεκτον σχεῖν αὐτῶν μεταβεβλημένας τὰς γραφάς.
οἱ δὲ (ὑπήκουον γὰρ ἔτι τοῖς Μακεδόσι τότε) τοὺς παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς
ἐμπειροτάτους τῶν γραφῶν, καὶ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν διαλέκτων, ἑβδομήκοντα
πρεσβυτέρους ἔπεμψαν Πτολεμαίῳ, ποιήσαντος τοῦ Θεοῦ ὅπερ
ἐβούλετο. Ὁ δὲ ἰδίᾳ πεῖραν αὐτῶν λαβεῖν θελήσας, εὐλαβηθείς τε
μήτι ἄρα συνθέμενοι, ἀποκρύψωσι τὴν ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς διὰ τῆς
ἑρμηνείας ἀλήθειαν, χωρίσας αὐτοὺς ἀπ᾽ ἀλλήλων, ἐκέλευσε τοὺς
πάντας τὴν αὐτὴν ἑρμηνείαν γράφειν· καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἐπὶ πάντων τῶν
βιβλίων ἐποίησε. Συνελθόντων δὲ αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτὸ παρὰ τῷ
Πτολεμαίῳ, καὶ συναντιβαλόντων ἑκάστου τὴν ἑαυτοῦ ἑρμηνείαν, ὁ
μὲν Θεὸς ἐδοξάσθη, αἱ δὲ γραφαὶ ὄντως θεῖαι ἐγνώσθησαν, τῶν πάντων
τὰ αὐτὰ ταῖς αὐταῖς λέξεσι, καὶ τοῖς αὐτοῖς ὀνόμασιν ἀναγορευσάντων
ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς μέχρι τέλους· ὤστε καὶ τὰ παρόντα ἔθνη
γνῶναι, ὅτι κατ᾽ ἐπίπνοιαν τοῦ Θεοῦ εἰσιν ἡρμηνευμέναι αἱ γραφαί.
καὶ οὐδέν γε θαυμαστὸν, τὸν Θεὸν τοῦτο ἐνηργηκέναι, ὅς γε καὶ ἐν
τῇ ἐπὶ Ναβουχοδονόσορ αἰχμαλωσίᾳ τοῦ λαοῦ διαφθαρεισῶν τῶν
γραφῶν, καὶ μετὰ ἑβδομήκοντα ἔτη τῶν Ἰουδαίων ἀνελθόντων εἰς
τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν, ἔπειτα ἐν τοῖς χρόνοις Ἀρταξέρξου τοῦ Περσῶν
βασιλέως, ἐνέπνευσεν Ἔσδρᾳ τῷ ἱερεῖ ἐκ τῆς φυλῆς Λευï, τοὺς τῶν
προγεγονότων προφητῶν πάντας ἀνατάξασθαι λόγους, καὶ ἀποκαταστῆσαι
τῷ λαῷ τὴν διὰ Μωσέως νομοθεσίαν.&mdash;3. Cum tanta
igitur veritate et gratia Dei interpretatæ sint Scripturæ, ex quibus
præparavit et reformavit Deus fidem nostram, quæ in Filium
ejus est, et servavit nobis simplices Scripturas in Ægypto, in qua
adolevit et domus Jacob, effugiens famem quæ fuit in Chanaan;
in qua et Dominus noster servatus est, effugiens eam persequutionem
quæ erat ab Herode; et hæc earum Scripturarum interpretatio
priusquam Dominus noster descenderet, facta sit, et antequam
Christiani ostenderentur, interpretata sit.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<p>
He likewise fully believed the fable of Aristeas
concerning the translation of the Septuagint by the
direction of one of the Ptolemies, whom he names
<emph>the son of Lagus</emph><note place='foot'>III. xxi. 2, 3.</note>. He does not relate it with all
the particularity of Josephus; but he relates the
separation of the seventy interpreters from each
other, and their miraculous agreement in the same
words and phrases from beginning to end. It is
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
clear, therefore, that he believed in the inspiration
of the Septuagint, so far as it is a translation of the
Hebrew; and no wonder that he was unable to avoid
extending the same feeling to the other books which
commonly accompany the translated portion.
</p>

<p>
He likewise mentions Theodotion of Ephesus, and
Aquila of Pontus, both Jewish proselytes, as having
wrongly translated Isaiah vii. 14<note place='foot'>III. xxi. 1. Ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ὡς ἔνιοί φασι τῶν νῦν μεθερμηνεύειν
τολμώντων τὴν γραφήν· Ἰδοὺ ἡ νεᾶνις ἐν γαστρὶ ἕξει, καὶ τέξεται
υἱόν· ὡς Θεοδοτίων ἡρμήνευσεν ὁ Ἐφέσιος, καὶ Ἀκύλας ὁ Ποντικὸς,
ἀμφότεροι Ἰουδαῖοι προσήλυτοι· οἷς κατακολουθήσαντες οἱ Ἐβιωναῖοι,
ἑξ Ἰωσὴφ αὐτὸν γεγενῆσθαι φάσκουσι.</note>. Theodotion was
the contemporary of Irenæus, and must have published
his version so recently, that it is wonderful
that Irenæus should have seen it.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, he mentions and distinguishes between the
genuine and ancient copies of the Scriptures and the
incorrect ones<note place='foot'>V. xxx. 1. Τούτων δὲ οὕτως ἐχόντων, καὶ ἐν πὰσι τοῖς σπουδαίοις
καὶ ἀρχαίοις ἀντιγράφοις τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ τούτου κειμένου κ. τ. λ.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Having noticed all the <emph>external</emph> matter, let us come
to the opinions of Irenæus in regard to the <emph>use and
value</emph> of the holy Scriptures, and the method of
<emph>understanding</emph> them. Although here his example is
more forcible than his precepts, it is satisfactory
that he speaks very definitely, and to the purpose.
</p>

<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>

<p>
For instance, he informs us that, after the Apostles
had preached the Gospel orally, they took care that
the substance of their preaching should be put in
writing, to be the ground and pillar of our faith<note place='foot'>III. i. 1. Non enim per alios dispositionem salutis nostræ
cognovimus, quam per eos, per quos Evangelium pervenit ad nos:
quod quidem tunc præconaverunt, postea vero per Dei voluntatem
in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt, fundamentum et columnam fidei
nostræ futurum.&mdash;&mdash;xi. 8. Neque autem plura numero quam hæc
sunt, neque rursus pauciora capit esse Evangelia. Ἐπειδὴ enim
τέσσαρα κλίματα τοῦ κόσμου, ἐν ᾧ ἐσμὲν, εἰσὶ, καὶ τέσσαρα καθολικὰ
πνεύματα, κατέσπαρται δὲ ἡ ἐκκλησία ἐπὶ πάσης τῆς γῆς, στύλος
δὲ καὶ στήριγμα ἐκκλησίας τὸ εὐαγγέλιον καὶ Πνεῦμα ζωῆς·
εἰκότως τέσσαρας ἔχειν αὐτὴν στύλους, πανταχόθεν πνέοντας τὴν
ἀφθαρσίαν καὶ ἀναζωπυροῦντας τοὺς ἀνθρώπους.</note>.
It is very remarkable that he should use this very
phrase in speaking of the Gospel, which St. Paul
had used in speaking of the Church itself; showing
apparently that it was by the custody of the Scriptures
that the Church was to sustain its office. Indeed
he expresses this in so many words in another
passage, when he says that the truth is preserved by
the keeping and reading of the Scripture, and preaching
consistently with it<note place='foot'>IV. xxxiii. 8. See p. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, note 5.</note>.
</p>

<p>
His own practice is perfectly consistent with his
principles. When he enters into controversy, his
first appeal, indeed, in the particular case in hand,
was to common sense, as showing the extreme absurdity
and glaring contradiction of the Gnostic
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
theories<note place='foot'>Lib. I. II.</note>. But as they claimed revelation for their
authority, he then goes to the Scripture, as the only
authentic <emph>record</emph> of revelation<note place='foot'>III. Præf. See p. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, note 10.</note>; and it is evident
that, on his own account, he would never have appealed
to any other authority in support of the <emph>great
and leading doctrines</emph> he has to deal with. When he
does bring in tradition as an independent and collateral
<emph>witness</emph> of revelation, he does so because the
Gnostics themselves appealed to tradition<note place='foot'>III. ii. 1. Cum enim ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem
convertuntur ipsarum Scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant,
neque sint ex auctoritate, et quia varie sint dictæ, et quia non
possit ex his inveniri veritas ab his, qui nesciant Traditionem.
Non enim per literas traditam illam, sed per vivam vocem: ob
quam causam et Paulum dixisse: <q>Sapientiam autem loquimur
inter perfectos; sapientiam autem non mundi hujus.</q> Et hanc
sapientiam unusquisque eorum esse dicit, quam a semetipso adinvenerit,
fictionem videlicet; ut digne secundum eos sit veritas,
aliquando quidem in Valentino, aliquando autem in Marcione,
aliquando in Cerintho; postea deinde in Basilide fuit, aut et in
illo qui contra disputat, qui nihil salutare loqui potuit. Unusquisque
enim ipsorum omnimodo perversus, semetipsum, regulam
veritatis depravans, prædicare non confunditur.</note> as something
more certain than Scripture. And having met
them upon this ground, he goes on<note place='foot'>III. v. 1. Traditione igitur, quæ est ab apostolis, sic se
habente in ecclesia et permanente apud nos, revertamur ad eam
quæ est ex Scripturis ostensionem eorum qui Evangelium conscripserunt
Apostolorum, &amp;c.</note>, in the large
remaining portion of his treatise, to refute their systems
by the induction of passages from the successive
portions of the Old and New Testaments.
</p>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>

<p>
Clearly, therefore, his disposition, where the question
was what God had revealed, would be to go,
first of all, and entirely, if possible, to Scripture; for
whereas the heretics held that the inspired volume
was obscure and uncertain<note place='foot'>III. ii. 1. Massuet (<hi rend='italic'>Diss.</hi> I. § 24) says, <q>Hanc non reprehendit
Irenæus, immo in sequentibus probat.</q> Now, to my
apprehension, he does tacitly disapprove the sentiment in the
very passage; and however he may acknowledge that there are
many <emph>parts</emph> of Scripture obscure and ambiguous, yet the whole
method of his arguing shows incontestably that he thought its
voice, on such points as he was discussing with the Gnostics,
perfectly unambiguous.</note>, he maintained that there
were truths contained in it without any doubt or obscurity,
and that those were the things in which the
sound-minded and pious would chiefly meditate<note place='foot'><p>II. xxvii. 1. Ὁ ὑγιὴς νοῦς καὶ ἀκίνδυνος καὶ εὐλαβὴς καὶ
φιλαληθὴς, ὅσα ἐν τῇ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐξουσίᾳ δέδωκεν ὁ Θεὸς, καὶ
ὑποτέταχε τῇ ἡμετέρᾳ γνώσει, ταῦτα προθύμως ἐκμελετήσει, καὶ ἐν
αὐτοῖς προκόψει, διὰ τῆς καθημερινῆς ἀσκήσεως ῥᾳδίαν τὴν μάθησιν
ἑαυτῷ ποιούμενος. Ἔστι δὲ ταῦτα, τά τε ὑπ᾽ ὄψιν πίπτοντα τὴν
ἡμετέραν, καὶ ὅσα φανερῶς καὶ ἀναμφιβόλως αὐτολεξεὶ ἐν ταῖς θείαις
γραφαῖς λέλεκται. Et ideo parabolæ debent non ambiguis adaptari:
sic enim et qui absolvit, sine periculo absolvit, et parabolæ
ab omnibus similiter absolutionem accipient; et a veritate [i. e.
per veritatem] corpus integrum, et simili aptatione membrorum,
et sine concussione perseverat.&mdash;2. Cum itaque universæ Scripturæ
et Prophetiæ et Evangelia in aperto et sine ambiguitate et
similiter ab omnibus audiri possint, etsi non omnes credunt.&mdash;&mdash;xxviii.
1. Habentes itaque regulam ipsam veritatem, et in aperto
positum de Deo testimonium, non debemus per quæstionum declinantes
[in] alias atque alias absolutiones ejicere firmam et
veram de Deo scientiam: magis autem absolutionem quæstionum
in hunc characterem dirigentes, exerceri quidem convenit per
inquisitionem mysterii et dispositionis exsistentis Dei; augeri
autem in charitate ejus, qui tanta propter nos fecit et facit.
</p>
<p>
Grabe argues from the first of these passages as though <emph>every</emph>
thing which God would have us know or believe were contained
in express words in Scripture, and thus incurs the reprehension
of Massuet. (<hi rend='italic'>Diss.</hi> III. § 11.) All that can be gathered from it
legitimately is, that the things clearly revealed are expressed in
Scripture without ambiguity, and that these are the most important.</p></note>.
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
And with regard to those things which are obscure
and doubtful, he taught that we should endeavour
to explain them by those parts which are unambiguous<note place='foot'>II. x. 1. Omnis autem quæstio non per aliud quod quæritur
habebit resolutionem, nec ambiguitas per aliam ambiguitatem solvetur
apud eos qui sensum habent, aut ænigmata per aliud majus
ænigma; sed ea quæ sunt talia ex manifestis et consonantibus
et claris accipiunt absolutiones.</note>.
</p>

<p>
There was, however, another aid which he looked
upon as of the most certain and most important
utility, so far as it extended, and that was the baptismal
creed, which he regarded as infallible for leading
to the right sense of Scripture upon fundamental
points, and according to which he thought all Scripture
ought to be interpreted<note place='foot'>I. ix. 4. Οὕτω δὲ καὶ ὁ τὸν κανόνα τῆς ἀληθείας ἀκλινῆ ἐν
ἑαυτῷ κατέχων, ὃν διὰ τοῦ βαπτίσματος εἴληφε, τὰ μὲν ἐκ τῶν
γραφῶν ὀνόματα καὶ τὰς λέξεις καὶ τὰς παραβολὰς ἐπιγνώσεται.&mdash;x.
1. See p. 91, note 7.</note>. It is evident, therefore,
that he regarded the tradition of the Church,
<emph>to that extent</emph>, as divine and infallible.
</p>

<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>

<p>
A third aid was to be found in the assistance of
the elders of the Church, who preserve the doctrine
of the Apostles<note place='foot'>IV. xxxii. 1. See p. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, note 8.</note>, and, with the order of the priesthood,
keep sound discourse and an inoffensive life<note place='foot'>IV. xxvi. 4. See p. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, note 7.</note>,
who have the succession from the Apostles, and, together
with the episcopal succession, have received
the sure gift of truth<note place='foot'>IV. xxvi. 2. See p. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, note 7.</note>. He who in this way studies
the Scriptures will judge (or condemn) all who are
in error<note place='foot'>IV. xxxiii. 1. Talis discipulus vere spiritalis recipiens Spiritum
Dei, qui ab initio in universis dispositionibus Dei adfuit
hominibus, et futura annuntiavit et præsentia ostendit et præterita
enarrat, judicat quidem omnes, ipse autem a nemine judicatur.
Nam judicat gentes.... Examinabit autem doctrinam
Marcionis, &amp;c.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious that he means the bishops of the
Churches, who were the chief preachers of those
times. And it is observable that he does not think
the succession a perfect guarantee of the truth being
preserved, otherwise he would not have added the
qualifications of sound discourse and a holy life. He
does not therefore support the idea that the truth is
necessarily preserved in any one Church by the succession,
or that any one bishop of any particular
Church (the Bishop of Rome, for instance,) is capable
of deciding the sense of Scripture authoritatively.
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
And, in point of fact, it is only upon <emph>fundamentals</emph>
that he recommends an appeal to the bishops, as sure
to guide the inquirer into truth.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious, moreover, that, although no doubt
God will aid and bless his ordinance of the ministry
at all times to the faithful soul, yet that the aid of
one's own particular pastor or bishop must be much
less capable of settling the mind now that Christ's
true pastors are opposed to each other, than in the
time of Irenæus, when they held all together. In
his time no such thing had occurred as a bishop of
Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, Rome, or Constantinople,
acknowledged by general consent to have
fallen into great and important error.
</p>

<p>
In short, we have no approach in Irenæus to the
idea of an interpreter so infallible as shall take away
from the private Christian all responsibility but that
of ascertaining him and following his decisions. He
points out means of arriving at truth; but he does
not speak of them as unfailing, except in the case
of those foundation truths which are now acknowledged
by the body of every ancient Church under
heaven.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. On The Nature And Use of Primitive Tradition.</head>

<p>
It was controversy which elicited from Irenæus a
declaration of his views as to the nature and use of
tradition. The Gnostics taught a different doctrine
from the Catholics on the nature and attributes of
God, the incarnation and life of Christ, and the whole
scheme of the divine dispensations. Against them
he takes up three different lines of argument: from
common sense, from tradition, and from Scripture.
The argument from common sense he carries on
through the first and second books, showing the inconsistencies,
contradictions, and absurdities of the
various Gnostic systems. It is evident, from his own
words, that it was his intention to rest his remaining
argument principally on the Scriptures; for in the
preface to the third book, in announcing the plan of
the rest of his work, he says that in that book he
shall bring forward his proofs from Scripture, without
mentioning tradition; but since they demurred
to its authority, asserting<note place='foot'>III. ii. 1. See p. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, note 9.</note> that it was imperfect and
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
self-contradictory, and, in short, that it was impossible
for any to learn the truth from it but those
who possessed the true <emph>tradition</emph>, (which they contended
was preserved amongst themselves, having
been communicated to them orally, and being, in
fact, that hidden wisdom which had been imparted
by the Apostles only to the perfect,) Irenæus likewise
appeals to tradition.
</p>

<p>
I cannot take leave of this passage without noticing
the extraordinary comments made upon it by
the Benedictine editor, Massuet, in the second of
his prefatory dissertations, art. iii. § 14.
</p>

<p>
He says, <q>Ex quibus hæc liquido sequuntur; 1,
ipsos omnium hæreticorum pessimos agnovisse et
confessos fuisse, <emph>Scripturas varie dictas esse</emph>, id est,
interdum obscuras esse, variosque iis subesse sensus:
2, obscurorum locorum sensum a traditione petendum
esse, non ea, <emph>quæ per literas tradita sit, sed per
vivam vocem</emph>: hæc non reprehendit Irenæus, immo
in sequentibus probat, ut mox videbitur: 3, traditionem
latius patere scripturis, et ab iis distingui,
utpote quæ earum sit interpres; quod et hæc Irenæi
conclusio demonstrat: <emph>Evenit itaque, neque scripturis
jam neque traditioni consentire eos</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
I will take his conclusions in their order:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>

<p>
1. So far is Irenæus from applauding the Gnostics
for <emph>admitting</emph> (not the variety of senses which the
Scripture may afford, but) the inconsistency of different
Scriptural statements, that it is evident that
he is <emph>blaming</emph> them for wishing to escape from the
obvious meaning of Scripture under this pretence.
I am not saying that he would have denied that
various senses of particular passages may appear
equally natural; but that is not the case as between
Irenæus and the Gnostics. He is evidently asserting
what he believes to be written throughout the Scriptures
as with a sunbeam, and brings in tradition, not
to explain the Scripture, but to confirm his view
of it.
</p>

<p>
2. It is very true that Irenæus would evidently
have gone to tradition to explain the obscurities of
Scripture, if in any point it could be so explained;
but that does not appear <emph>from this passage</emph>: on the
contrary, it is the heretics who are <emph>here</emph> for appealing
to it, and not to such a tradition as he approved, but
to one which was capable of no proof that it was
apostolical. And with regard to the tradition he
appealed to being an <emph>unwritten</emph> tradition; in the first
place, he does appeal to <emph>written</emph> tradition when he
can, viz. to the epistles of St. Clement and St. Polycarp;
and in regard to the unwritten tradition which
he adduces, the only tradition of that kind to which
both he and the Romanist writers agree to appeal is
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
the Baptismal Creed (as will be shown presently);
for on two of the other points on which he adduces
a different kind of unwritten tradition, viz. the millenium
and the age of Christ at his crucifixion, his
views are rejected by the Roman Church.
</p>

<p>
3. That primitive tradition must originally have
been wider than Scripture (at least upon points <emph>not
of faith</emph>), must be true from the very nature of the
case. But this does not by any means follow from
Irenæus's distinguishing between Scripture and tradition,
because what he means is simply this, that
the Gnostic tenets were at variance with apostolical
truth, whether gathered from Scripture or handed
down by tradition. The traditional truth he brings
forward against them is <emph>identical</emph> with what he deduces
from the written word.
</p>

<p>
Having shown, then, that really apostolical tradition
unequivocally opposed the Gnostic tenets, he
returns again to the Scriptures, and goes on in the
large remaining portion of his work (which, contrary
to his intention, spread itself into a fourth, and even
a fifth book,) to show how inconsistent they were
with the Scriptures, first of the Old, and afterwards
of the New Testament, and how important to our
salvation those verities were which they impugned.
</p>

<p>
It is perfectly evident, therefore, that the mind of
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
Irenæus naturally went to Scripture, either to prove
doctrine or to refute error; and that he regarded it
as being, to all orthodox Christians, the natural
standard of appeal. With regard to the Gnostics,
he evidently thought that they were past conviction
from either reason, tradition, or Scripture; because,
whatever criterion was produced, they had something
to say against it or to turn it aside<note place='foot'>III. ii. 1. See supra, p. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, note 9.&mdash;2. Cum autem ad eam
iterum traditionem, quæ est ab Apostolis, quæ per successiones
presbyterorum in Ecclesiis custoditur, provocamus eos; adversantur
traditioni, dicentes se non solum presbyteris, sed etiam Apostolis
exsistentes sapientiores, sinceram invenisse veritatem.... Evenit
itaque, neque Scripturis jam, neque traditioni consentire eos.</note>: but to single-minded
Christians he felt that the written word
must be the great authority, and arguments drawn
from it the most perfectly conclusive. He speaks of
some things in it as admitting no doubt; he points
to an obvious aid to the interpretation of ambiguities,
by calling in plainer things to explain the doubtful;
he speaks of the New Testament as the ground and
pillar of our faith; and he declares that the truth is
preserved by the keeping, reading, and consistent
exposition of the Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
In what way, then, does he appeal to tradition?
In this part of his work he calls it in as establishing
the same <emph>general</emph> views, which he confirms more at
length from Scripture; as preparing the mind to
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
believe that the view he takes of Scripture is the
true one; as a separate and independent witness to
the selfsame truths which he is preparing to confirm
by an adduction of multiplied passages of Holy
Writ. He does not bring it forward to establish
any thing not hinted at in the Bible; neither, on
the other hand, does he bring it forward to show
what others had gathered out of the Scriptures; but
he adduces it as a separate testimony, emanating
originally from the same source as the Scriptures<note place='foot'>Conf. III. iii. 1. p. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, note 7, et i. 1. p. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, note 5.</note>,
and therefore, so far as it went, a fitting criterion of
their meaning.
</p>

<p>
I have chosen to adduce the opening of the <emph>third</emph>
book first of all, because Irenæus enters more professedly
there into his motives for appealing to tradition;
but he had made the appeal, as may have
been seen, in an early part of the <emph>first</emph> book<note place='foot'>I. x. 1. See p. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>.</note>. The
manner of the appeal is somewhat different in the
two places: in the first book he appeals to it to show
the strong contrast between the inconsistencies and
contradictions of the Gnostics and the unity and
consistency of catholic teaching; in the latter, to
confirm his own views of Scripture. It is true
that in both these cases the appeal is in some sense
of a negative character, i. e. it is for the purpose of
proving that such and such doctrines are <emph>not</emph> to be
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
received; but in other cases he makes a directly
positive use of it, viz. to prove particular doctrines
which do not appear to have been explicitly disputed.
</p>

<p>
What, then, is the tradition to which Irenæus
assigns this important function? It is that faith
which the Church received from the Apostles, and
distributes to her children<note place='foot'>III. Præf. p. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, note 10.</note>; which may be seen in
every Church<note place='foot'>III. iii. 1. See p. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, note 7.</note>; which is handed down by the bishops
in all the several Churches<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>; which is taught to
every person when he is baptized<note place='foot'>I. ix. 4. p. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, note 6.</note>; which was in
his time preserved in the Church of Rome, in particular,
by the confluence of the faithful from every
side<note place='foot'>III. iii. 2. p. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, note 8.</note>; in the Church of Smyrna by S. Polycarp and
his successors; in the Church of Ephesus, founded
by St. Paul, and watched over by St. John; and in
the rest of the Asiatic Churches<note place='foot'>III. iii. 4. p. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, notes 2 &amp; 3.</note>; which may likewise
be learnt in the first epistle of S. Clement, and
in the epistle of S. Polycarp to the Philippians<note place='foot'>III. iii. 3, 4. p. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, notes 2 &amp; 6.</note>;
which was one and the same throughout the
Churches, so that ability cannot increase its efficacy,
nor weakness diminish it; so that knowledge may
add to it the explanation of difficulties, but cannot
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
change the faith<note place='foot'>I. x. 2. Οὓτω καὶ τὸ κήρυγμα τῆς ἀληθείας πανταχῆ φαίνει,
καὶ φωτίζει πάντας ἀνθρώπους τοὺς βουλομένους εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν
ἀληθείας ἐλθεῖν. καὶ οὔτε ὁ πάνυ δυνατὸς ἐν λόγῳ τῶν ἐν ταῖς
ἐκκλησίαις προεστώτων ἕτερα τούτων ἐρεῖ· (οὐδείς γὰρ ὑπὲρ τὸν
διδάσκαλον·) οὔτε ὁ ἀσθενὴς ἐν τῷ λόγῳ ἐλαττώσει τὴν παράδοσιν·
μιᾶς γὰρ καὶ τῆς αὐτῆς πίστεως οὔσης, οὔτε ὁ πόλυ περὶ αὐτῆς
δυνάμενος εἰπεῖν, ἐπλεόνασεν, οὔτε ὁ τὸ ὀλίγον ἠλαττόνησε.</note>; and so that wisdom interprets
Scripture conformably to it<note place='foot'>I. x. 3. Τὸ δὲ πλεῖον ἢ ἔλαττον κατὰ σύνεσιν εἰδέναι τινάς ...
γίνεται ... ἐν τῷ τὰ, ὅσα ἐν παραβολαῖς εἴρηται, προσεπεργάζεσθαι
καὶ οἰκειοῦν τῇ τῆς πίστεως ὑποθέσει κ. τ. λ.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious, from these quotations, that the particular
tradition which Irenæus adduces <emph>against the
Gnostics</emph> is the substance of the baptismal creed; and
thence, perhaps, it may be inferred that he would
confine tradition altogether to the creed. But it
must be remembered that, in declining to go to
Gnostic tradition, and choosing in preference that
which is truly apostolical, the principle of his appeal
is this: that the Apostles delivered the doctrines
of the Gospel by preaching, &amp;c. to the different
Churches, and by individual instruction to the particular
persons whom they made bishops of the
Churches; that the bishops had delivered down the
same mass of truths to the Churches they presided
over, and to their successors; and that the truth
might be ascertained by discovering what was universally
received in all the apostolical sees<note place='foot'>III. iii. 1. p. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, note 7; I. x. 1, 2. p. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>.</note>. But
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
this truth was not confined to the creed, for there
are other truths as certain as those in the creed,
which are not specified in it; and the very creed
itself was variable, or rather was variously stated at
different times<note place='foot'>Thus Irenæus gives two different versions of it (I. x. 1. et
III. iv. 2); in one of which he mentions Christ's ascent into
heaven <emph>in the flesh</emph>, and other matters, which are omitted in the
other.</note>.
</p>

<p>
But we are not left to inference alone to learn
the views of Irenæus; he instances the epistles of
Clement and Polycarp as containing true traditions,
and <emph>they</emph> exhibit other truths beyond those of the
creed. Again, the faith, which, if the Apostles had
left no writings, he affirms must have been kept up
by tradition, and which was, in fact, kept up in barbarous
nations without the aid of writing<note place='foot'>III. iv. 2. See p. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, note 3.</note>, must have
been something more extensive than the mere elementary
points of belief. Nay, his assertion that
when we are in doubt, even upon <emph>trifling</emph> points, it
is a duty to have recourse to the most ancient
Churches<note place='foot'>III. iv. 1. ibid.</note>, shows at once that the province of tradition,
in his mind, was far wider than the transmission
of simply fundamental points; it was a great
system of doctrine, discipline, and practice, which
such an observation looked at; and there can be
but little doubt that, although his subject in his great
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
Treatise leads him to adduce it formally, only on the
subject of doctrine, that he found himself bound by
it upon all points which appeared to be thus universally
handed down in the Churches.
</p>

<p>
But then it must be confessed that Irenæus stood
in a position with regard to this tradition very different
from that in which we stand. It was a thing
which lived about him in all the daily intercourse of
life, and respecting which there was scarcely a possibility
of a doubt; whereas to us it is a thing which
has to be established by evidence, which does not
come to our minds unsought. It was a thing <emph>then</emph>
which the most unlearned knew thoroughly; for it
was the very atmosphere in which he breathed: to
us learning is required, and actual application to the
subject. The Church <emph>then</emph> testified directly to the
individual: now we have to ascertain the Church's
testimony by the further testimony of individuals.
It is impossible, therefore, that apostolical tradition
should have the same evidence to men's minds now
which it had then; although we may think it ought
to be reverently followed, wherever and by whomsoever
it can be ascertained.
</p>

<p>
Again, we have seen that the medium through
which Irenæus believed pure tradition to be transmitted
was the bishops of the Churches; but it does
not follow that he thought every bishop, or the
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
bishops of any particular Church, an unerring depository
of such tradition. He supposed the case of a
bishop who was in the succession, but yet did not
hold fast the Apostles' doctrine<note place='foot'>IV. xxvi. 4. p. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, note 8.</note>, and he evidently
implies that such a person was not to be adhered to;
it is, therefore, not any individual bishop, or the
bishop of any particular see, that he would appeal
to, but the aggregate of the bishops of the universal
Church.
</p>

<p>
It is remarkable how strong is the resemblance
between the positions occupied by the Gnostics and
Irenæus respectively, and those taken up by Romanists
and the Church of England. Both that ancient
father and ourselves think Scripture perfectly clear
upon the fundamental points to the singleminded,
go first and last to Scripture upon all doctrinal
points, and make tradition only auxiliary and subordinate
to it. Both the Gnostics and the Romanists
complain of the insuperable difficulties of the Scripture
without tradition, and thus make tradition practically
set aside Scripture; and the tradition they
appeal to turns out, when examined, to be nothing
more nor less than their own teaching.
</p>

<p>
But besides this <emph>public</emph> tradition, extant throughout
all the Churches, there is another kind of tradition
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
he brings forward, viz. that kept up by a
direct line from the Apostles by the testimony of
individuals. This he brings forward under various
forms of expression, as <q>I have heard from an elder,
who had heard from those who had seen and been
instructed by the Apostles;</q> <q>Wherefore the elders,
who are disciples of the Apostles, say,</q> &amp;c.; <q>As
the elders, who saw John, the Lord's disciple, remember
that they heard of him;</q> <q>And all the elders,
who associated with John, the Lord's disciple, testify
that John taught them this; for he remained with
them down to the time of Trajan.</q> He appeals to
it on the subject of Christ's descent into hell<note place='foot'>IV. xxvii. 1. Quemadmodum audivi a quodam presbytero,
qui audierat ab his qui Apostolos viderant, et ab his qui didicerant,
sufficere veteribus, de his quæ sine consilio Spiritus egerunt,
eam quæ ex Scripturis esset correptionem.... 2. Et
propter hoc Dominum in ea, quæ sunt sub terra, descendisse,
evangelizantem et illis adventum suum.</note>, which
did not enter into the earliest creeds; on the place
of the saints departed<note place='foot'>V. v. 1. Διὸ καὶ λέγουσιν οἱ πρεσβύτεροι, τῶν ἀποστόλων
μαθηταὶ, τοὺς μετατεθέντας ἐκεῖσε μετατεθῆναι· i. e. to Paradise.</note>; on the millennium<note place='foot'>V. xxxiii. 3. Quemadmodum presbyteri meminerunt, qui
Joannem discipulum Domini viderunt, audisse se ab eo, quemadmodum
de temporibus illis (i. e. those of the new heavens
and new earth) docebat Dominus.</note>; as well
as on the fact that Jesus continued his teaching till
past forty years of age<note place='foot'>II. xxii. 6. p. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, note 1.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>

<p>
It is evident that such testimony, carried down in
one chain, unchecked by any other similar chain,
must be liable to great deterioration. An instance
of this may be seen in the last-mentioned case in
which he quotes this kind of evidence; viz. his idea
that Jesus continued his teaching till past forty years
of age<note place='foot'>II. xxii. 6.</note>. All other writers who speak on the subject
are agreed that Irenæus, or some person through
whom this assertion came, must have made some
mistake; that our Lord, in fact, began his teaching
shortly after his baptism, and continued it through
three passovers, and no more. And yet we have
apparently very strong evidence for the assertion of
Irenæus; for he declares that all the elders who
companied with John the Apostle affirmed it, and
that some of them declared that they had it from
other Apostles. The probability is, that Irenæus,
who was quite a youth when acquainted with these
persons, had misunderstood what he had heard in
their conversations with each other, or remembered
it incorrectly after a long lapse of years, being biassed
by his own view of a passage of Scripture which he
quotes in confirmation<note place='foot'>II. xxii. 6.</note>, and which may be the real
foundation of the opinion in question.
</p>

<p>
It is likewise evident that this tradition in regard
to mere facts not connected with any important doctrine,
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
and depending upon the correctness of the
<emph>memory</emph> of an individual, is of very different character
from that of important facts and doctrines, and points
of discipline, kept up publicly in all Christian Churches
and <emph>witnessed</emph> to by him as actually subsisting in his
own day or at the very time of his writing. At the
same time they may be received, as we receive other
historical facts, when not contradicted by other evidence.
</p>

<p>
And something of the same degree of uncertainty
must in like manner hang about the transmission of
doctrines or opinions by such a channel. And it
is to be remembered that Irenæus, when he testifies
of these, is not in the same position as when he
speaks of public doctrine, discipline, or customs.
There he is the witness of the combined teaching of
many lines of apostolical succession; here, for all
that appears, of only one: and that one requires to
be checked or confirmed by other evidence before it
can gain our full assent. If what is gained in this
way fall in with Scripture, or explains or carries out
more fully the meaning of Scripture in a manner not
inconsistent with other Scripture, then we may feel
that it is to be treasured up, as being in all probability
a fragment of apostolical tradition. If, again,
it is confirmed by other sufficient testimony, it may
be looked upon in the same light, in proportion to
the degree of evidence: for although Irenæus unquestionably
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
quoted these latter traditions as undoubted
truths, it is impossible that they should,
upon his single testimony, appear so to our minds.
</p>

<p>
There is, however, one general remark which applies
to all the various instances in which he appeals
to tradition, and that is, that he does not appear to
have known any thing of a transmitted comment on
the text of Scripture. The only way in which he
applies tradition to the interpretation of Scripture
is, by laying down certain facts of our Lord's history,
which were universally acknowledged or handed
down by sufficient testimony, or certain doctrines of
religion or general principles which were universally
received as of apostolical authority, and bringing
them forward in confirmation of the views which he
himself deduced from a comparison and accumulation
of texts.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. On The Creed.</head>

<p>
The Baptismal Creed having been mentioned in the
two previous chapters, in the one as a guide in the
interpretation of Scripture, in the other as embodying
(to a certain extent) Primitive Tradition, it appears
natural to bring forward in the next place
such notices of it as Irenæus furnishes.
</p>

<p>
We find, then, that it was customary at baptism
to rehearse to every person the rule of faith held
throughout the Catholic Church; in other words,
the Creed<note place='foot'>I. ix. 4. p. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, note 6.</note>. This, indeed, was not uniform in language,
but the same points appear to have been
adhered to, and to have been stated in much the
same order. Irenæus, indeed, does not distinctly
copy any creed: but he rehearses all the chief points
of it in two different passages, which I will give at
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
length; these being the first clear traces we have of
the primitive creed.
</p>

<p>
The first is as follows<note place='foot'>I. x. 1. The Greek of this passage is to be found at p. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>.</note>:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>For the Church, although spread throughout the
world, even to the utmost bounds of the earth, and
having received from the Apostles and their disciples
the faith in one God the Father Almighty,
Maker of heaven and earth, and the seas, and all
that in them is: and in one Jesus Christ, the Son
of God, who was incarnate for our salvation: and in
one Holy Ghost, who through the prophets preached
the dispensations, and the advents, and the birth of
a Virgin, and the Passion, and the resurrection from
the dead, and the ascension into heaven in flesh of
the beloved Christ Jesus our Lord, and his coming
from heaven in the glory of the Father, to gather
together all things in one, and to raise from the dead
all flesh of all mankind; that according to the good
pleasure of the invisible Father, every knee may bow
to Christ Jesus, our Lord and God and Saviour and
King, of things in heaven and things in earth and
things under the earth, and every tongue may confess
to him; and that he may execute just judgment
upon them all, and send into eternal fire the spirits
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
of wickedness, and the angels that sinned and were
in rebellion, and the ungodly and unjust and lawless
and blasphemous amongst men; and bestowing
life upon the just and holy, and those who have kept
his commandments and remained in his love, some
from the beginning and some after repentance, might
give them incorruption and clothe them with eternal
glory: having received this preaching and this
faith, as we said before, the Church, though dispersed
throughout the world, keeps it diligently,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
This passage strikes us at once as containing fragments
of a creed the same as that of Nice, repeated
in portions in the same order, although the general
arrangement of the creeds is departed from.
</p>

<p>
The other passage is this<note place='foot'>III. iv. 1. Quid enim? Et si de aliqua modica quæstione
disceptatio esset, nonne oporteret in antiquissimas recurrere Ecclesias,
in quibus Apostoli conversati sunt, et ab eis de præsenti
quæstione sumere quod certum et re liquidum est? Quid autem
si neque Apostoli quidem Scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne
oportebat ordinem sequi Traditionis, quam tradiderunt iis quibus
committebant Ecclesias?&mdash;2. Cui ordinationi assentiunt multæ
gentes barbarorum, eorum qui in Christum credunt, sine charta
et atramento scriptam habentes per Spiritum in cordibus suis
salutem, et veterem Traditionem diligenter custodientes; in unum
Deum credentes Fabricatorem cœli et terræ, et omnium quæ in
eis sunt, per Christum Jesum Dei Filium: qui propter eminentissimam
erga figmentum suum dilectionem, eam quæ esset
ex Virgine generationem sustinuit, ipse per se hominem adunans
Deo, et passus sub Pontio Pilato, et resurgens, et in claritate
receptus, in gloria venturus Salvator eorum qui salvantur, et
Judex eorum qui judicantur, et mittens in ignem æternum transfiguratores
veritatis, et contemptores Patris sui et adventus ejus.
Hanc fidem qui sine literis crediderunt, quantum ad sermonem
nostrum barbari sunt: quantum autem ad sententiam et consuetudinem
et conversationem, propter fidem perquam sapientissimi
sunt, et placent Deo, conversantes in omni justitia et castitate
et sapientia. Quibus si aliquis annuntiaverit ea, quæ ab hæreticis
adinventa sunt, proprio sermone eorum colloquens, statim concludentes
aures, longo longius fugient, ne audire quidem sustinentes
blasphemum colloquium. Sic per illam veterem Apostolorum
Traditionem, ne in conceptionem quidem mentis admittunt,
quodcumque eorum portentiloquium est: nequedum enim congregatio
fuit apud eos, neque doctrina instituta.</note>:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>But what if the Apostles had not left us any
writings? must we not have followed the order of
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
that tradition which they delivered to those to whom
they entrusted the Churches? Which order is
assented to by those many barbarous tribes who
believe in Christ, who have salvation written by the
Spirit in their hearts without paper and ink, and
diligently keep the old tradition; believing in one
God, the Maker of heaven and earth, and of all that
in them is, by Christ Jesus the Son of God: who for
his most exceeding love toward his own handywork,
submitted to be born of the Virgin, himself by himself
uniting man to God, and suffered under Pontius
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
Pilate, and rose again, and was received up in glory,
and will come again to be the Saviour of those
who are saved, and the judge of those who are
judged, and sendeth into eternal fire those who pervert
the truth, and despise his Father and his
coming.</q>
</p>

<p>
The order of the creed is better preserved in this
than in the other, but it is not so full in its statements.
</p>

<p>
There is one other allusion to the opening words
of the creed<note place='foot'>I. iii. 6. Τὴν πίστιν εἰς ἕνα Θεὸν Πατέρα παντοκράτορα, καὶ
εἰς ἕνα Κύριον Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν τὸν Υἱὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI. Freewill, Predestination, And Election.</head>

<p>
No controversy had arisen amongst Christians in the
time of Irenæus on the subject of predestination,
but heathen Stoics believed in an irresistible fate,
and the Gnostics taught a natural and essential difference
between the soul of one man and that of
another, by virtue of which the former was of course
raised at death to an intimate union with the Supreme
Essence, whilst the latter could never hope
for such an elevation, although he might be raised
to a higher state than that of earthly existence.
</p>

<p>
Both these notions Irenæus combatted. He taught
that man is endued with freewill<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 1. Illud autem, quod ait: <q>Quoties volui colligere
filios tuos, et noluisti?</q> veterem legem libertatis hominis
manifestavit: quia liberum eum Deus fecit ab initio, habentem
suam potestatem, sicut et suam animam, ad utendum sententia Dei
voluntarie, et non coactum a Deo. Βία enim Θεῷ οὐ πρόσεστιν·
ἀγαθὴ δὲ γνώμη πάντοτε συμπάρεστιν αὐτῷ. Et propter hoc consilium
quidem bonum dat omnibus. Posuit autem in homine
potestatem electionis, quemadmodum et in angelis (etenim angeli
rationabiles); uti hi quidem qui obedissent, juste bonum sint
possidentes, datum quidem a Deo, servatum vero ab ipsis. Qui
autem non obedierunt, juste non invenientur cum bono, et meritam
pœnam percipient: quoniam Deus quidem dedit benigne
bonum, ipsi vero non custodierunt diligenter illud, neque pretiosum
arbitrati sunt, sed supereminentiam bonitatis contempserunt.
Abjicientes igitur bonum, et quasi respuentes, merito
omnes justum judicium incident Dei.... Dedit ergo Deus
bonum, ... et qui operantur quidem illud, gloriam et honorem
percipient, quoniam operati sunt bonum, cum possint non operari
illud; hi autem qui illud non operantur, judicium justum excipient
Dei, quoniam non sunt operati bonum, cum possint operari
illud.&mdash;2. Εἰ φύσει οἱ μὲν φαῦλοι, οἱ δὲ ἀγαθοὶ γεγόνασιν, οὐθ᾽
οὗτοι ἐπαινετοὶ, ὄντες ἀγαθοὶ, τοιοῦτοι γὰρ κατεσκευάσθησαν· οὐτ᾽
ἐκεῖνοι μεμπτοὶ, οὕτως γεγονότες. Ἀλλ᾽ ἐπειδὴ οἱ πάντες τῆς αὐτῆς
εἰσι φύσεως, δυνάμενοί τε κατασχεῖν κὶι πρᾶξαι τὸ ἀγαθὸν, καὶ
δυνάμενοι πάλιν ἀποβαλεῖν αὐτὸ, καὶ μὴ ποιῆσαι· δικαίως καὶ παρ᾽
ἀνθρώποις τοῖς εὐνομουμένοις, καὶ πολὺ πρότερον παρὰ Θεῷ, οἱ μὲν
ἐπαινοῦνται καὶ ἀξίας τυγχάνουσι μαρτυρίας, τῆς τοῦ καλοῦ καθόλου
ἐκλογῆς καὶ ἐπιμονῆς· οἱ δὲ καταιτιῶνται καὶ ἀξίας τυγχάνουσι
ζημίας, τῆς τοῦ καλοῦ καὶ ἀγαθοῦ ἀποβολῆς. καὶ διὰ τούτου οἱ
προφῆται παρήνουν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις δικαιοπραγεῖν, καὶ τὸ ἀγαθὸν
ἐξεργάζεσθαι· ... ὡς ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν ὄντος τοῦ τοιούτου, καὶ διὰ τὴν
πολλὴν ἀμέλειαν εἰς λήθην ἐκπεπτωκότων, καὶ γνώμης δεομένων
ἀγαθῆς, ἣν ὁ ἀγαθὸς Θεὸς παρέσχε γινώσκειν διὰ τῶν προφητῶν.&mdash;3.
Ταῦτα γὰρ πάντα τὸ αὐτεξούσιον ἐπιδείκνυσι τοῦ ἀνθρώπου,
καὶ τὸ συμβουλευτικὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ, ... ἀποτρέποντος μὲν τοῦ
ἀπειθεῖν αὐτῷ, ἀλλὰ μὴ βιαζομένου.&mdash;5. Et non tantum in operibus,
sed etiam in fide liberum et suæ potestatis arbitrium hominis
servavit Dominus, dicens: <q>Secundum fidem tuam fiat tibi;</q>
propriam fidem hominis ostendens, quoniam propriam suam habet
sententiam. Et iterum: <q>Omnia possibilia sunt credenti;</q> et,
<q>Vade, sicut credidisti, fiat tibi.</q> Et omnia talia suæ potestatis
secundum fidem ostendunt hominem. Et propter hoc is <q>qui
credit ei, habet vitam æternam; qui autem non credit Filio, non
habet vitam æternam, sed ira Dei manebit super ipsum.</q>&mdash;&mdash;V.
xxvii. 1. Si ergo adventus Filii super omnes quidem similiter
advenit, judicialis est autem, et discretor credentium et non credentium,
quoniam ex sua sententia credentes faciunt ejus voluntatem,
et ex sua sententia credentes faciunt ejus voluntatem,
et ex sua sententia indictoaudientes non accedunt ad ejus
doctrinam: manifestum, quoniam et Pater ejus omnes quidem
similiter fecit, propriam sententiam unumquemque habentem, et
sensum liberum; respicit autem omnia, et providet omnibus,
<q>solem suum oriri faciens super malos et bonos, et pluens super
justos et injustos.</q>&mdash;2. Et ὅσα τὴν πρὸς Θεὸν τηρεῖ φιλίαν,
τούτοις τὴν ἰδίαν παρέχει κοινωνίαν. κοινωνία δὲ Θεοῦ, ζωὴ καὶ
φῶς, καὶ ἀπόλαυσις τῶν παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀγαθῶν. ὅσοι autem ἀφίστανται
κατὰ τὴν γνώμην αὐτῶν τοῦ Θεοῦ, τούτοις τὸν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ χωρισμὸν
ἐπάγει.&mdash;&mdash;xxviii. 1. Ἐπεὶ οὖν ἐν τῷ αἰῶνι τούτῳ, οἱ μὲν προστρέχουσι
τῷ φωτὶ, καὶ διὰ τῆς πίστεως ἑνοῦσιν ἑαυτοὺς τῷ Θεῷ, οἱ
δὲ ἀφίστανται τοῦ φωτὸς, καὶ ἀφορίζουσιν ἑαυτοὺς τοῦ Θεοῦ· ἐκδέχεται
ὁ Λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ, τοῖς πᾶσιν ἁρμόζουσαν οἴκησιν ἐπάγων·
τοῖς μὲν ἐν τῷ φωτὶ, πρὸς τὸ ἀπολαύειν αὐτοὺς τῶν ἐν αὐτῷ ἀγαθῶν,
τοῖς δὲ ἐν τῷ σκότει, πρὸς τὸ μετέχειν αὐτοὺς τῆς ἐν αὐτῷ
μοχθηρίας. Διὰ τοῦτό φησι, τοὺς μὲν ἐκ δεξιῶν ἀνακαλέσασθαι εἰς
τὴν τῶν οὐρανῶν βασιλείαν, τοὺς δὲ ἐξ ἀριστερῶν εἰς τὸ αἰώνιον
πῦρ πέμψειν· ἑαυτοὺς γὰρ πάντων ἐστέρησαν τῶν ἀγαθῶν.</note>, having good
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
and evil set before him, and having the power to
choose or reject either one or the other, and to act
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
accordingly<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 1, 2. V. xxvii. 1. xxviii. 1.</note>; that God has always treated men
as having the power to act for themselves<note place='foot'>IV. xv. 2. Si autem quidam, propter inobedientes Israëlitas
et perditos, infirmum dicunt legis doctorem, invenient in ea vocatione
quæ est secundum nos multos quidem vocatos, paucos vero
electos; et intrinsecus lupos, a foris vero indutos pelles ovium;
et id quod erat semper liberum et suæ potestatis in homine semper
servasse Deum et suam exhortationem.&mdash;&mdash;xxxvii. 1.</note>, rewarding
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
or punishing them<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 1, 5. V. xxvii. 2. xxviii. 1.</note>, praising or blaming<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 2.</note> them
according to the nature of their choice; and that
this proves that we have freewill<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 3.</note>: that in fact the
circumstance that our faith is called our own, and
is rewarded<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 5. V. xxvii. 1. xxviii. 1.</note>, proves that we are free agents<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 5.</note>. In
conformity with this opinion, he teaches that men
are redeemed, not by compulsion, but by persuasion<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 3.&mdash;V. i. 1. Et quoniam injuste dominabatur
nobis apostasia, et cum natura essemus Dei omnipotentis, alienavit
nos contra naturam, suos proprios faciens discipulos; potens in
omnibus Dei Verbum, et non deficiens in sua justitia, juste etiam
adversus ipsam conversus est apostasiam, ea quæ sunt sua redimens
ab ea: non cum vi, quemadmodum illa initio dominabatur
nostri, ea quæ non erant sua insatiabiliter rapiens; sed secundum
suadelam, quemadmodum decebat Deum suadentem et non vim
inferentem, accipere quæ vellet: ut neque quod est justum confringeretur,
neque antiqua plasmatio Dei deperiret.</note>;
that each person has a portion of divine
light given him, and will be recompensed according
as he keeps or rejects it<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 1.</note>; and that as each man's
salvation thus depends upon his own exertion, and
cannot be attained without it, so our reward will be
the more valued for having been gained by exertion<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 7. See p. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, note 5.</note>.
</p>

<p>
We can see, therefore, that Irenæus could not
have believed that the salvation of the elect was
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
accomplished by the mere will of God concerning
the individuals, either in opposition to their own will
or by constraining their wills; although he asserted
very fully the necessity of divine grace to cause our
freewill to take a right direction<note place='foot'>III. xvii. 2. Sicut arida terra, si non percipiat humorem, non
fructificat, sic et nos, lignum aridum exsistentes primum, nunquam
fructificaremus vitam, sine superna voluntaria pluvia.&mdash;3.
Quapropter necessarius nobis est ros Dei, ut non comburamur,
neque infructuosi efficiamur.</note>.
</p>

<p>
And yet he was a believer in divine <emph>predestination</emph>.
He believed that some were predestined to have the
gift of incorruptibility imparted to them, (which we
have seen to mean the Divine Spirit, by which we
become the adopted children of God,) and thus to
have life in the sight of God, whereas they were
originally in a state of death<note place='foot'>V. i. 1. Qui nunc nuper facti sumus, a Solo Optimo et bono,
et ab eo qui habet donationem incorruptibilitatis, in eam, quæ
est ad eum, similitudinem facti, (prædestinati quidem ut essemus,
qui nondum eramus, secundum præscientiam Patris, facti autem
initium facturæ,) accepimus in præcognitis temporibus secundum
ministrationem Verbi, qui est perfectus in omnibus: quoniam
Verbum potens, et homo verus, sanguine suo rationabiliter redimens
nos, redemptionem semetipsum dedit pro his, qui in captivitatem
ducti sunt.</note>. But he no where
implies that they could not lose this gift, but the
contrary<note place='foot'>IV. xli. 3. Quemadmodum enim in hominibus indictoaudientes
patribus filii abdicati, natura quidem filii eorum sunt, lege
vero alienati sent (non enim hæredes fiunt naturalium parentum),
eodem modo apud Deum, qui non obediunt ei, abdicati ab eo,
desierunt filii ejus esse.... Cum enim converterentur et
pœnitentiam agerent et quiescerent a malitia, filii poterant esse
Dei, et hæreditatem consequi incorruptelæ quæ ab eo præstatur....
Verum quando credunt et subjecti esse Deo perseverant
et doctrinam ejus custodiunt, filii sunt Dei: cum autem abscesserint
et transgressi fuerint, diabolo adscribuntur principi, ei qui
primo sibi, tunc et reliquis, causa abscessionis sit factus.</note>. So again he teaches that God intentionally
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
delivers some men over to unbelief without
a trial. But who are they? Those who, he foresees,
will not believe<note place='foot'>IV. xxix. 2. Si igitur et nunc, quotquot scit non credituros
Deus, cum sit omnium præcognitor, tradidit eos infidelitati
eorum, et avertit faciem ab hujusmodi, relinquens eos in tenebris,
quæ ipsi sibi elegerunt; quid mirum si et tunc nunquam
crediturum Pharaonem, cum his qui cum eo erant, tradidit eos
suæ infidelitate?&mdash;&mdash;V. xxvii. 2. Ὅσοι autem ἀφίστανται κατὰ
τὴν γνώμην αὐτῶν τοῦ Θεοῦ, τούτοις τὸν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ χωρισμὸν [eam
quæ electa est ab ipsis, separationem&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Old Latin Version</hi>]
ἐπάγει. Χωρισμὸς δὲ τοῦ Θεοῦ θάνατος· καὶ χωρισμὸς φωτὸς σκότος·
καὶ χωρισμὸς Θεοῦ ἀποβολὴ πάντων τῶν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀγαθῶν.</note>. He was of opinion that
there is a predestined <emph>number</emph> of those who shall be
saved eternally, and that when that number is completed,
the end of the world will come<note place='foot'><p>II. xxxiii. 5. Καὶ διὰ τοῦτο πληρωθέντος τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ, οὗ
αὐτὸς παρ᾽ αὐτῷ προώρισε, πάντες οἱ ἐγγραφέντες εἰς ζωὴν ἀναστήσονται,
ἴδια ἔχοντες σώματα, καὶ ἰδίας ἔχοντες ψυχὰς, καὶ ἴδια
πνεύματα, ἐν οἷς ἐυηρέστησαν τῷ Θεῷ· οἱ δὲ τῆς κολάσεως ἄξιοι
ἀπελεύσονται εἰς τὴν αὐτὴν, καὶ αὐτοὶ ἰδίας ἔχοντες ψυχὰς καὶ ἴδια
σώματα, ἐν οἷς ἀπέστησαν ἀπὸ τῆς τοῦ Θεοῦ χάριτος. Καὶ παύσονται
ἑκάτεροι τοῦ γεννᾷν ἔτι καὶ γεννᾶσθαι, καὶ γαμεῖν καὶ γαμεῖσθαι·
ἵνα τὸ σύμμετρον φῦλον τῆς προορίσεως ἀπὸ Θεοῦ ἀνθρωπότητος
ἀποτελεσθεὶς τὴν ἁρμονίαν τηρήση τοῦ Πατρός.
</p>
<p>
The same idea is expressed by Clement of Rome and Justin
Martyr.
</p>
<p>
Clem. R. <hi rend='italic'>ad Corr.</hi> I. 2. Ἀγὼν ἦν ὑμῖν ἡμέρας τε καὶ νυκτὸς
ὑπὲρ πάσης τῆς ἀδελφότητος, εἰς τὸ σώζεσθαι μετ᾽ ἐλέους καὶ συνειδήσεως
τὸν ἀριθμὸν τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν αὐτοῦ.
</p>
<p>
Justin M. <hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> I. 45. Ἀγαγεῖν τὸν Χριστὸν εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν
ὁ Πατὴρ τῶν πάντων Θεὸς ... ἔμελλε, καὶ κατέχειν ἕως ἂν
πατάξῃ τοὺς ἐχθραίνοντας αὐτῷ δαίμονας, καὶ συντελεσθῇ ὁ ἀριθμὸς
τῶν προεγνωσμένων αὐτῷ, ἀγαθῶν γινομένων καὶ ἐναρέτων, δι᾽ οὓς
καὶ μηδέπω τὴν ἐπικύρωσιν πεποίηται.</p></note>: the very
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
idea embodied in our burial service<note place='foot'><q>Beseeching thee that it may please thee of thy gracious
goodness shortly to accomplish the number of thine elect, and
to hasten thy kingdom.</q></note>. But he no
where hints that the <emph>individuals</emph> were predestined, as
well as the number, or that those who were predestined
to have the gift of immortality, were all in the
number of those who should be saved eternally: so
that the more we examine, the more clear does it
become that he would have been opposed to <emph>Calvinistic</emph>
predestination.
</p>

<p>
Who, then, are those who are predestined to the
gift of immortality? The manner in which he speaks
of <emph>election</emph> will enable us to answer this question.
In explaining the parable of the vineyard let out to
husbandmen, he says,<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvi. 2. Qui priores, sive primum, per servilem legisdationem
vocaverat Deus, hic posteriores, sive postea, per adoptionem
assumpsit. Plantavit enim Deus vineam humani generis,
primo quidem per plasmationem Adæ et electionem patrum;
tradidit autem colonis per eam legisdationem quæ est per Moysem;
sepem autem circumdedit, id est, circumterminavit eorum
culturam; et turrim ædificavit, Hierusalem elegit; et torcular
fodit, receptaculum prophetici Spiritus præparavit.... Non
credentibus autem illis, novissime misit Filium suum, (misit Dominum
nostrum Jesum Christum) quem cum occidissent mali coloni,
projecerant extra vineam. Quapropter tradidit eam Dominus
Deus non jam circumvallatam, sed expansam in universum mundum
aliis colonis, reddentibus fructus temporibus suis, turre electionis
exaltata ubique et speciosa: ubique enim præclara est
ecclesia, et ubique circumfossum torcular; ubique enim sunt qui
suscipiunt Spiritum.</note> that, after the first set of husbandmen
had been cast out, the vineyard was <q>no
longer fenced in, but opened to all the world, and
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
the tower of <emph>the election</emph> exalted every where, beautiful
to look on; for,</q> said he, <q><emph>the Church</emph> is every
where distinctly visible, and every where is there a
winepress dug, and every where are those who receive
the Spirit.</q> Here we find election commensurate
with the visible Church (indeed he knows no
other): and so he proceeds further on<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvi. 8. Sed quoniam et patriarchas qui elegit et nos,
idem est Verbum Dei, &amp;c.</note> to speak of
<q>the Word of God, who <emph>elected</emph> the patriarchs <emph>and us</emph>;</q>
just as in the passage before cited<note place='foot'>V. i. 1. supra.</note> he had said, <q><emph>We</emph>
who were not as yet were predestined to be;</q> that
is, spiritually, through redemption. And so in another
place he speaks of the Church as <q>the congregation
of God; which God, that is the Son, has himself
collected by himself<note place='foot'>III. vi. 1. Hæc (Ecclesia) enim est synagoga Dei, quam
Deus, hoc est Filius, ipse per semetipsum collegit.</note>;</q> and in another passage,
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
<q>the wages of Christ are men collected out of various
and differing nations into one company of faith<note place='foot'>IV. xxi. 3. Variæ oves, quæ fiebant huic Jacob merces; et
Christi merces, qui ex variis et differentibus gentibus in unam
cohortem fidei convenientes fiunt homines.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
All these passages reflect light upon each other,
and exhibit the all-wise God as planning from eternity
the last dispensation, by which He chooses,
through the Divine Word, to gather out of the
world men of all nations, and to restore to them the
lost gift of immortality, by adopting them for his
own children, and bestowing on them his Spirit, and
thus uniting them in the one body of his Church;
so that those who believe, and continue in obedience
to Him, and hold fast his teaching, continue his
children; whilst those who do not obey Him are cut
off from Him, and cease to be his children. And as
baptism is the sign and means of our union with
God and the reception of the Holy Spirit<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>.</note>, so baptism
is the sign and pledge of this predestination
and election.
</p>

<p>
There is another question as to this election, upon
which Irenæus throws but little light; that is, whether
God has elected into his Church upon foreseen
faith or not. He expressly declares<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, note 1.</note> that God leaves
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
in darkness and unbelief those who, He foresees, will
not believe; but what is the precise application of that
declaration, whether to those to whom God vouchsafes
no opportunity of becoming acquainted with
the Gospel, or to those who, living in the hearing of
the Gospel, do not receive his grace, is by no means
clear. And it would be unsafe, therefore, to argue
that Irenæus believed that God predestines men to
grace from foreseen faith. The two things may appear
to us correlative; but we must remember that
there had been no controversy on the subject, and
therefore he cannot be supposed to have weighed
his language as we should perhaps do at present.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII. On Baptism.</head>

<p>
The doctrine of the Church in regard to baptism
has afforded less dispute than almost any other down
to the very times in which we live. It was fully
recognized by Irenæus, and appears scattered up and
down in various parts of his writings.
</p>

<p>
He asserts in direct terms that baptism is our new
birth to God<note place='foot'>I. xxi. 1. Καὶ ὅτι μὲν εἰς ἐξάρνησιν τοῦ βαπτίσματος, τῆς εἰς
Θεὸν ἀναγεννήσεως, καὶ πάσης τῆς πίστεως ἀπόθεσιν, ὑποβέβληται
τὸ εἶδος τοῦτο ὑπὸ τοῦ Σατανᾶ, κ. τ. λ.</note>, and ascribes to infants a share in that
new birth equally with grown persons<note place='foot'>II. xxii. 4. See p. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, note 2.</note>. There is
no room for any equivocal meaning in these passages.
It is not merely that he speaks, as a thing of course,
of infants being baptized, (which, by the plain force
of words, he manifestly does,) but he directly ascribes
to them also the new birth, which he asserts
to be baptism. This testimony in favour of infant
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
baptism and infant regeneration is very valuable
from one who lived so near the apostolical times.
</p>

<p>
The necessity of the laver of regeneration he
states to arise from the original corruption of man<note place='foot'>V. xv. 3. Et quoniam in illa plasmatione, quæ secundum
Adam fuit, in transgressione factus homo indigebat lavacro regenerationis.</note>,
whom he asserts to be and to remain carnal, until he
receives the Spirit of God<note place='foot'>V. vi. 1. viii. 2. See p. <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, note 8.</note>. The water of baptism
is therefore a type of the Holy Spirit<note place='foot'>III. xvii. 2. Unde et Dominus pollicitus est mittere se Paracletum,
qui nos aptaret Deo. Sicut enim de arido tritico massa
una fieri non potest sine humore, neque unus panis; ita nec nos
multi unum fieri in Christo Jesu poteramus, sine aqua quæ de
cœlo est. Et sicut arida terra, si non percipiat humorem, non
fructificat; sic et nos, lignum aridum exsistentes primum, nunquam
fructificaremus vitam, sine superna voluntaria pluvia.
Corpora enim nostra per lavacrum illam, quæ est ad incorruptionem,
unitatem acceperunt; animæ autem per Spiritum.</note>; and in baptism
our bodies receive the union with God to eternal
life, which our souls at the same time receive by the
Spirit<note place='foot'>III. xvii. 2.</note>. In receiving the Holy Spirit, therefore, the
soul of man receives that which it had not by nature
since the fall; it becomes a living soul; for the
Spirit of God is the life of the soul<note place='foot'>V. vi. 1.&mdash;vii. 1. Incompositus est enim et simplex Spiritus,
et ipse vita est eorum qui percipiunt illum.&mdash;&mdash;ix. 2. Spiritum
Patris, qui emundat hominem, et sublevat in vitam.&mdash;&mdash;xii. 2.
Ἕτερόν ἐστι πνοὴ ζωῆς, ἡ καὶ ψυχικὸν ἀπεργαζομένη τὸν ἄνθρωπον·
καὶ ἕτερον πνεῦμα ζωοποιοῦν, τὸ καὶ πνευματικὸν αὐτὸν ἀποτελοῦν....
διὸ καὶ πάλιν ὁ αὐτὸς Ἠσαΐας διαστέλλων τὰ προειρημένα
φησί· Πνεῦμα γὰρ παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ ἐξελεύσεται, καὶ πνοὴν πᾶσαν
ἐγὼ ἐποίησα· τὸ πνεῦμα ἰδίως ἐπὶ τοῦ Θεοῦ τάξας τοῦ ἐκχέοντος
αὐτὸ in novissimis temporibus διὰ τῆς υἱοθεσίας ἐπὶ τὴν ἀνθρωπότητα,
τὴν δὲ πνοὴν κοινῶς ἐπὶ τῆς κτίσεως· καὶ ποίημα ἀναγορεύσας
αὐτὴν. ἕτερον δέ ἐστι τὸ ποιηθὲν τοῦ ποιήσαντος. Ἡ οὖν πνοὴ πρόσκαιρος,
τὸ δὲ πνεῦμα ἀένναον. καὶ ἡ μὲν πνοὴ ἀκμάσασα πρὸς βραχὺ,
καὶ, καιρῷ τινι παραμείνασα, μετὰ τοῦτο πορεύεται, ἄπνουν καταλιποῦσα
ἐκεῖνο, περὶ ὃ ἦν τὸ πρότερον· τὸ δὲ περιλαβὸν ἔνδοθεν καὶ ἔξωθεν
τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ἅτε ἀεὶ παραμόνιμον, οὐδέποτε καταλείπει αὐτὸν.</note>. This Spirit
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
he elsewhere calls the Spirit of remission of sins<note place='foot'>IV. xxxi. 2. Quando igitur hic vitale semen, id est, Spiritum
remissionis peccatorum per quem vivificamur, effudit in
humanum genus?</note>,
and declares that we are quickened by it. In connexion
with what he says of our flesh being united
to God in baptism, we may take what he elsewhere
says, that our flesh is a member of Christ<note place='foot'>V. ii. 3. Πῶς δεκτικὴν μὴ εἶναι λέγουσι τὴν σάρκα τῆς δωρεᾶς
τοῦ Θεοῦ, ἥτις ἐστὶ ζωὴ αἰώνιος, τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ σώματος καὶ αἵματος
τοῦ Κυρίου τρεφομένην, καὶ μέλος αὐτοῦ ὑπάρχουσαν;</note>.
</p>

<p>
If we inquire for his opinion of the actual spiritual
state of the Christian body, we shall find him declaring
that those only are the children of God who
do the will of God<note place='foot'>IV. xli. 2. Secundum igitur naturam quæ est secundum conditionem,
ut ita dicam, omnes filii Dei sumus, propter quod a
Deo omnes facti sumus: secundum autem dictoaudientiam [obedientiam]
et doctrinam non omnes filii Dei sunt, sed qui credunt
ei et faciunt ejus voluntatem: qui autem non credunt et non
faciunt ejus voluntatem filii et angeli sunt diaboli.</note>; that some remain thus in the
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
love of God, even from the time of their baptism;
others fall away, and cease to be his children; and
of those who fall, some by repentance recover their
relation to Him, and remain thenceforward in his
love<note place='foot'>I. x. 1. ad finem. See p. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, note 7.&mdash;&mdash;IV. xli. 3. See
p. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, note 5.</note>.
</p>

<p>
There is one passage<note place='foot'>IV. xxvii. 2. Si enim hi qui præcesserunt nos in charismatibus
veteres, propter quos nondum Filius Dei passus erat,
delinquentes in aliquo, et concupiscentiæ carnis servientes, tali
affecti sunt ignominia (viz. to have their transgressions recorded
in the Scripture), quid passuri sunt qui nunc sunt, qui contempserunt
adventum Domini, et deservierunt voluptatibus suis?
Et illis quidem curatio et remissio peccatorum mors Domini fuit:
propter eos vero qui nunc peccant Christus non jam morietur,
jam enim mors non dominabitur ejus: sed veniet Filius in gloria
Patris, exquirens ab actoribus et dispensatoribus suis pecuniam
quam eis credidit cum usuris; et quibus plurimum dedit, plurimum
ab eis exiget.</note> in which he appears at first
sight to deny forgiveness to those who sin since the
coming of Christ, and thence to give some countenance
to the idea that wilful sin of Christians cannot
be forgiven. What he really does say is simply
this; that whereas the ancients who sinned before
the coming of Christ did, when they had the Gospel
preached to them in the regions below, and believed,
receive remission of sins, there is no such hope
awaiting those who now commit sin. If they die in
sin, there is no further sacrifice remaining for them
to be preached to them in the regions of the dead.
</p>

<p>
We can scarcely avoid remarking the strict correspondence
between the doctrine of Irenæus upon
this subject and that contained in the formularies of
the Church of England, particularly in the Baptismal
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
Service and the 16th and 27th Articles. And it is
the more valuable, because it does not appear <emph>directly</emph>
in the form of a precise statement, but indirectly, as
in the Scriptures themselves; showing that it pervaded
the whole practical system with which his
mind was imbued. The difficulty in the Scriptures
unquestionably is, that regeneration is no where in
so many words affirmed respecting infants, and that
there is language, as in St. John's first epistle, appearing
to restrict it to persons capable of actual
obedience. Now in Irenæus we find that omission
supplied, and yet he uses without scruple the same
kind of language as St. John; showing that in the
system he inherited, and that by an interval of only
one descent from St. John himself, the two things
which, with our prejudices, are apt to appear inconsistent,
were parts of one and the same doctrine.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIII. The Eucharist.</head>

<p>
Irenæus has expressed himself so much more fully
on the subject of the holy Eucharist than any other
writer near his time, that it is not wonderful that his
opinions should be appealed to by those who have
entered into the various discussions on the subject.
And his language has just so much of ambiguity
about it as to allow of hanging upon it a more exact
and positive meaning than he ever thought of. Every
sentence, and almost every word therefore, requires
to be well weighed, that we may come at his real
meaning. And we must bear in mind that he wrote
hundreds of years before any controversy had arisen
on the subject, and consequently is not to be judged
of as though he had written since.
</p>

<p>
There are two or three important passages which
bear directly on the subject, and I do not know how
to do justice to it without giving them at length.
</p>

<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>

<p>
The first I shall take is that in the fifth book<note place='foot'>V. ii. 2. Vani autem omnimodo, qui universam dispositionem
Dei contemnunt, et carnis salutem negant, et regenerationem
ejus spernunt, dicentes non eam capacem esse incorruptibilitatis.
Si autem non salvetur hæc, videlicet nec Dominus sanguine suo
redemit nos; neque calix Eucharistiæ communicatio sanguinis
ejus est, neque panis quem frangimus communicatio corporis
ejus est. Sanguis enim non est, nisi a venis et carnibus, et a
reliqua quæ est secundum hominem substantia, qua vere factum
est Verbum Dei. Sanguine suo redemit nos, quemadmodum et
Apostolus ejus ait: <q>In quo habemus redemptionem per sanguinem
ejus, remissionem peccatorum.</q> Et ἐπειδὴ μέλη αὐτοῦ
ἐσμεν, καὶ διὰ τῆς κτίσεως τρεφόμεθα, τὴν δὲ κτίσιν ἡμῖν αὐτος
παρέχει, τὸν ἥλιον αὐτοῦ ἀνατέλλων καὶ βρέχων καθὼς βούλεται·
τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς κτίσεως ποτήριον αἷμα ἴδιον ὡμολόγησε, ἐξ οὗ τὸ ἡμέτερον
δεύει αἷμα, καὶ τὸν ἀπὸ τῆς κτίσεως ἄρτον ἴδιον σῶμα διεβεβαιώσατο,
ἀφ᾽ οὗ τὰ ἡμέτερα αὔξει σώματα.&mdash;3. Ὁπότε οὖν καὶ τὸ
κεκραμένον ποτήριον καὶ ὁ γεγονὼς ἄρτος ἐπιδέχεται τὸν λύγον τοῦ
Θεοῦ, καὶ γίνεται ἡ εὐχαριστία σῶμα Χριστοῦ, ἐκ τούτων δὲ αὔξει
καὶ συνίσταται ἡ τῆς σαρκὸς ἡμῶν ὑπόστασις· πῶς δεκτικὴν μὴ εἶναι
λέγουσι τὴν σάρκα τῆς δωρεᾶς τοῦ Θεοῦ, ἥτις ἐστὶ ζωὴ αἰώνιος, τὴν
ἀπὸ τοῦ σώματος καὶ αἵματος τοῦ Κυρίου τρεφομένην, καὶ μέλος αὐτοῦ
ὑπάρχουσαν; καθὼς ὁ μακάριος Παῦλός φησιν, ἐν τῇ πρὸς
Ἐφεσίους ἐπιστολῇ· ὅτι μέλη ἐσμὲν τοῦ σώματος, ἐκ τῆς σαρκὸς
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐκ τῶν ὀστέων αὐτοῦ· οὐ περὶ πνευματικοῦ τινος καὶ
ἀοράτου ἀνθρώπου λέγων ταῦτα, (τὸ γὰρ πνεῦμα οὔτε ὀστέα, οὔτε
σάρκα ἔχει) ἀλλὰ περὶ τῆς κατὰ τὸν ἀληθινὸν ἄνθρωπον οἰκονομίας,
τῆς ἐκ σαρκὸς καὶ νεύρων καὶ ὀστέων συνεστώσης· ἥτις καὶ ἐκ τοῦ
ποτηρίου αὐτοῦ, ὅ ἐστι τὸ αἷμα αὐτοῦ, τρέφεται, καὶ ἐκ τοῦ ἄρτου, ὁ
ἐστι τὸ σῶμα αὐτοῦ, αὔξεται. καὶ ὅνπερ τρόπον τὸ ξύλον τῆς ἀμπέλου
κλιθὲν εἰς τὴν γῆν τῷ ἰδίῳ καιρῷ ἐκαρποφόρησε, καὶ ὁ κόκκος
τοῦ σίτου πεσὼν εἰς τὴν γῆν, καὶ διαλυθεὶς, πολλοστὸς ἐγέρθη διὰ τοῦ
πνεύματος τοῦ Θεοῦ, τοῦ συνέχοντος τὰ πάντα· ἔπειτα δὲ διὰ τῆς σοφίας
τοῦ Θεοῦ εἰς χρῆσιν ἐλθόντα ἀνθρώπων, καὶ προσλαμβανόμενα
τὸν λόγον τοῦ Θεοῦ, εὐχαριστία γίνεται, ὅπερ ἐστὶ σῶμα καὶ αἷμα
τοῦ Χριστοῦ· οὕτως καὶ τὰ ἡμέτερα σώματα ἐξ αὐτῆς τρεφόμενα,
καὶ τεθέντα εἰς τὴν γῆν, καὶ διαλυθέντα ἐν αὐτῇ, ἀναστήσεται ἐν
τῷ ἰδίῳ καιρῷ, τοῦ λόγου τοῦ Θεοῦ τὴν ἔγερσιν αὐτοῖς χαριζομένου
εἰς δόξαν Θεοῦ καὶ πατρός.</note>, where
he is combating the Gnostic notion that the flesh is
incapable of salvation. His words are as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And altogether absurd are they who despise the
whole of the divine arrangement, and deny the salvation
of the flesh, and reject its regeneration, saying
that it is not capable of immortality. But if
it is not saved, then the Lord did not redeem us by
his blood; nor is the cup of the Eucharist the communion
of his blood, nor the bread which we break
the communion of his body. For there is no blood,
except from veins and flesh, and the rest of man's
substance, in which the Word of God was truly
made. With his blood he redeemed us; as also his
apostle saith: <emph>in whom we have redemption through his
blood, even the remission of sins</emph>. And since we are his
members, and are nourished by the creature, and he
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
himself gives us the creature, making his sun to rise
and sending rain as it pleaseth him, he has recognised
the cup of the creature for his own blood,
with which he tinges (δεύει) our blood, and the bread
of the creature he has ordained to be his own body,
by which he strengthens our body.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Since, therefore, both the mingled cup and the
created bread receive the word of God, and the
Eucharist becomes the blood and body of Christ,
and by these the substance of our flesh gains strength
and subsists, how can they say that the flesh is not
capable of the gift of God, which is eternal life,
when it is nourished by the body and blood of the
Lord, and is his member? As St. Paul saith: <emph>For
we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones</emph>: not saying these things of some spiritual and
invisible man (for the spirit has neither flesh nor
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
bones); but concerning the divine work in the real
man, consisting of flesh and veins and bones; which is
also nourished from his cup, which is his blood, and
is strengthened by the bread, which is his body. And
as the wood of the vine, bent down into the earth,
in its proper season bears fruit, and the grain of
wheat, falling into the earth and becoming dissolved,
rises manifold through the Spirit of God, which takes
in all things; and then, through the wisdom of God,
having come to the use of men, and having received
the word of God, becomes the Eucharist, which is
the body and blood of Christ; so also our bodies,
being nourished by it, and being deposited in the
earth and dissolved in it, will rise again in due season,
the word of God granting to them resurrection
to the glory of God, even the Father.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the beginning of this passage we have an explicit
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
acknowledgment that it is in some way or
another in the real body and blood of Christ that we
communicate in the Eucharist; and I am willing to
grant that the whole passage, on a cursory reading,
might be taken to imply that the bread and wine
was <emph>changed</emph> into the literal body and blood of Christ;
for he appears to speak of our corporeal frames being
literally sustained by the body and blood of our
Lord. But when we find him speaking of the necessity
of our bodily frames being sustained by himself,
arising out of the fact that we, even our bodies,
are his members, we see immediately that, as we
cannot be literally and corporeally his members, so
the change of the bread into his body, and that of
the wine into his blood, in order to nourish our
bodies with himself, cannot be a literal and corporeal
change. And so he does not say that Jesus effected
any such change, but simply that he <emph>recognized</emph>
the cup for his blood, and <emph>ordained</emph> the bread to be
his body<note place='foot'>Tertullian, who uses this selfsame argument against the
Gnostics, expressly calls the bread the <emph>representation</emph> of Christ's
body; arguing that if Christ had no real body, there could have
been no representation or <emph>figure</emph> of it.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Contra Marcionem</hi>, IV.
40. Acceptum panem et distributum discipulis corpus suum
illum fecit, <q>Hoc est corpus meum</q> dicendo, id est, figura corporis
mei: figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus....
Sic et in calicis mentione testamentum constituens sanguine suo
obsignatum, substantiam corporis confirmavit: nullius enim corporis
sanguis potest esse, nisi carnis.&mdash;See likewise Bishop
Kaye's <hi rend='italic'>Tertullian</hi> (p. 454, note 137, of the second edition) for
other passages.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>

<p>
Before I attempt to draw out any other of the
opinions implied in this passage, I will go to another
contained in the fourth book<note place='foot'>IV. xviii. 4. Quoniam igitur cum simplicitate Ecclesia offert,
juste munus ejus purum sacrificium apud Deum deputatum est.
Quemadmodum et Paulus Philippensibus ait: <q>Repletus sum
acceptis ab Epaphrodito, quæ a vobis missa sunt, odorem suavitatis,
hostiam acceptabilem, placentem Deo.</q> Oportet enim nos
oblationem Deo facere, et in omnibus gratos inveniri Fabricatori
Deo, in sententia pura et fide sine hypocrisi, in spe firma, in
dilectione ferventi, primitias earum, quæ sunt ejus, creaturarum
offerentes. Et hanc oblationem Ecclesia sola puram offert Fabricatori,
offerens ei cum gratiarum actione ex creatura ejus. Judæi
autem non offerunt: manus enim eorum sanguine plenæ sunt; non
enim receperunt Verbum, quod [or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per quod</foreign>] offertur Deo. Sed
neque omnes hæreticorum synagogæ. Alii enim alterum præter
fabricatorem dicentes Patrem, ea quæ secundum nos creata sunt,
offerentes ei, cupidum alieni ostendunt eum, et aliena concupiscentem.
Qui vero ex defectione et ignorantia et passione
dicunt facta ea, quæ sunt secundum nos; ignorantiæ, passionis,
et defectionis fructus offerentes, peccant in Patrem suum, contumeliam
facientes magis ei, quam gratias agentes. Quomodo
autem constabit eis, eum panem in quo gratiæ actæ sint corpus
esse Domini sui, et calicem sanguinis ejus, si non ipsum Fabricatoris
mundi Filium dicant, id est, Verbum ejus, per quod lignum
fructificat, et defluunt fontes, et terra dat primum quidem
fœnum, post deinde spicam, deinde plenum triticum in spica?&mdash;5.
Πῶς autem τὴν σάρκα λέγουσιν εἰς φθορὸν χωρεῖν, καὶ μὴ μετέχειν
τῆς ζωῆς, τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ σώματος τοῦ Κυρίου καὶ τοῦ αἵματος
αὐτοῦ τρεφομένην; ἢ τὴν γνώμην ἀλλαξάτωσαν, ἢ τὸ προφέρειν τὰ
εἰρημένα παραιτείσθωσαν. Ἡμῶν δὲ σύμφωνος ἡ γνώμη τῇ εὐχαριστίᾳ,
καὶ ἡ εὐχαριστία rursus βεβαιοῖ τὴν γνώμην nostram: προσφέρομεν
δὲ αὐτῷ τὰ ἴδια, ἐμμελῶς κοινωνίαν καὶ ἕνωσιν ἀπαγγέλλοντες,
καὶ ὀμολογοῦντες σαρκὸς καὶ πνεύματος ἔγερσιν. Ὡς γὰρ
ἀπὸ γῆς ἄρτος προσλαμβανόμενος τὴν ἔκκλησιν τοῦ Θεοῦ, οὐκέτι
κοινὸς ἄρτος ἐστὶν, ἀλλ᾽ εὐχαριστία, ἐκ δύο πραγμάτων συνεστηκυῖα,
ἐπιγείου τε καὶ οὐρανίου· οὕτως καὶ τὰ σώματα ἡμῶν μεταλαμβάνοντα
τῆς εὐχαριστίας, μηκέτι εἶναι φθαρτὰ, τὴν ἐλπίδα τῆς
εἰς αἰῶνας ἀναστάσεως ἔχοντα.&mdash;6. Offerimus enim ei, non quasi
indigenti, sed gratias agentes dominationi ejus, et sanctificantes
creaturam.</note>. It is this:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Since, therefore, the Church offers with singleness
of heart, its sacrifice is rightly accounted pure
with God. As also Paul saith to the Philippians:
<hi rend='italic'>For I am filled with those things which I have received
from Epaphroditus, which were sent by you, a sweet
savour, an acceptable sacrifice, well pleasing to God.</hi>
For it is our duty to make an offering to God, and
in all things to be found grateful to God our Maker,
offering to him the first fruits of his creatures with
a pure mind and unfeigned faith, in hope unshaken,
in fervent charity. And this oblation the Church
alone offers pure to the Creator, offering to him of
his own work with giving of thanks. But the Jews
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
do not offer it; for their hands are full of blood; for
they did not receive the Word, who is offered to
God [or through whom the offering is made to God],
neither indeed do all the assemblies of the heretics....
How, indeed, can they feel assured that the
bread over which thanksgiving is made, is the body
of their Lord, and the cup that of his blood, if they
do not call himself the Son of the Creator of the
world, that is, his Word, by whom the wood bears
fruit, and the springs gush forth, and the earth
affords first the blade, after that the ear, then the
full corn in the ear?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And how, again, can they say that the flesh,
which is sustained by the body of the Lord and by
his blood, turns to corruption, and partakes not of
life? Either let them alter their view, or let them
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
decline to offer the before-mentioned gifts. But our
view harmonizes with the Eucharist, and the Eucharist
again confirms our view: and we offer to him his
own, making a corresponding profession of communion
and union, and acknowledging the resurrection
of flesh and spirit. For as the bread which comes
from the earth, receiving the invocation of God, is
no longer common bread, but Eucharist, consisting
of two things, an earthly and a heavenly, so also our
bodies, partaking of the Eucharist, are no longer
corruptible, having the hope of the resurrection to
eternity. For we offer to him, not as though he
needed, but giving thanks to his Divine Majesty,
and sanctifying the work of his hands.</q>
</p>

<p>
To understand this passage more completely, it
will be necessary to go back a little. Irenæus is
showing, contrary to the Gnostic doctrine, that the
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
Old and New Covenants emanate from one and the
same God, adopting different methods at different
periods of the world. He points out, therefore, that
the offerings of the law of Moses were not intended
to be permanent, and that, even under the law, God
undervalued sacrifice as compared with obedience.
He then goes on to affirm<note place='foot'>IV. xvii. 5. Sed et suis discipulis dans consilium primitias
Deo offerre ex suis creaturis (non quasi indigenti, sed ut ipsi nec
infructuosi nec ingrati sint), eum, qui ex creatura panis est, accepit,
et gratias egit, dicens: <q>Hoc est corpus meum;</q> et calicem
similiter qui est ex ea creatura quæ est secundum nos, suum
sanguinem confessus est, et novi Testamenti novam docuit oblationem;
quam ecclesia ab apostolis accipiens, in universo mundo
offert Deo,&mdash;ei, qui alimenta nobis præstat, primitias suorum
munerum.</note> that the prophecy of
Malachi that sacrifices should cease, and that notwithstanding
a pure offering should throughout the
world be offered to the name of God, was fulfilled in
the Eucharist; for he informs us that Jesus, <q>instructing
his disciples to offer to God the first
fruits of his creatures (not as though he needed, but
that they might not be unfruitful or ungrateful),
took the created thing, bread, and gave thanks, saying,
<q>This is my body;</q> and likewise the cup of the
earthly creature he acknowledged as his blood, and
taught them the new offering of the New Testament;
which the Church, receiving from the Apostles,
offers throughout the world to God,&mdash;to him
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
who affords us our sustenance, the first fruits of his
gifts.</q>
</p>

<p>
Here we see very distinctly what is the offering
which the Church offers in the Lord's Supper, viz.
the creatures or elements of bread and wine, presented
as the first fruits of his gifts, and as a thank-offering
to him for the rest<note place='foot'><p>Clement of Rome and Justin Martyr exhibit the same view.
Clem. R. <hi rend='italic'>ad Corr.</hi> I. 40. Πάντα τάξει ποιεῖν ὀφείλομεν, ὅσα ὁ
Δεσπότης ἐπιτελεῖν ἐκέλευσεν· κατὰ καιροὺς τεταγμένους τάς τε προσφορὰς
καὶ λειτουργίας ἐπιτελεῖσθαι.&mdash;And to show what kind of
<emph>offering</emph> is spoken of in connection with the λειτουργία, take the
following passage from § 44. Ἁμαρτία γὰρ οὐ μικρὰ ἡμῖν ἔσται,
ἐὰν τοὺς ἀμέμπτως καὶ ὁσίως προσενέγκοντας τὰ δῶρα τῆς Ἐπισκοπῆς
ἀποβάλωμεν.
</p>
<p>
Justin is more express: <hi rend='italic'>Dial. cum Tryph.</hi> 41. Περὶ δὲ τῶν ἐν
παντὶ τόπῳ ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν τῶν ἐθνῶν προσφερομένων αὐτῷ θυσιῶν, τουτέστι
τοῦ ἄρτου τῆς εὐχαριστίας καὶ τοῦ ποτηρίου ὁμοίως τῆς εὐχαριστίας.
And again § 117. Ὅτι μὲν οὖν καὶ εὐχαὶ καὶ εὐχαριστίαι
ὑπὸ τῶν ἀξίων γινόμεναι τέλειαι μόναι καὶ εὐάρεστοι εἰσὶ τῷ Θεῷ
θυσίαι, καὶ αὐτός φημι· ταῦτα γὰρ μόνα καὶ Χριστιανοὶ παρέλαβον
ποιεῖν, καὶ ἐπ᾽ ἀναμνήσει δὲ τῆς τροφῆς αὐτῶν ξηρᾶς τε καὶ ὑγρᾶς,
ἐν ᾖ καὶ τοῦ πάθους ὃ πέπονθε δι᾽ αὐτοῦ ὁ Θεὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ μέμνηται.</p></note>.
</p>

<p>
The same idea appears again in a fragment edited
by Pfaff<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Irenæi Scripta Anecdota</hi>, Frag. 2. p. 29. Διότι καὶ ἑ προσφορὰ
τῆς εὐχαριστίας οὐκ ἔστι σαρκικὴ ἀλλὰ πνευματικὴ, καὶ ἐν
τούτῳ καθαρά. Προσφέρομεν γὰρ τῷ Θεῷ τὸν ἄρτον καὶ τό
ποτήριον τῆς εὐλογίας, εὐχαριστοῦντες αὐτῷ, ὅτι τῇ γῇ ἐκέλευσεν
ἐκφύσαι τοὺς καρποὺς τούτους εἰς τροφὴν ἡμετέραν. καὶ
ἐνταῦθα τὴν προσφορὰν τελέσαντες ἐκκαλοῦμεν τὸ Πνεῦμα τὸ
ἅγιον, ὅπως ἀποφῄνη τὴν θυσίαν ταύτην καὶ τὸν ἄρτον σῶμα τοῦ
Χριστοῦ, καὶ τό ποτήριον τὸ αἷμα τοῦ Χριστοῦ· ἵνα οἱ μεταλάβοντες
τούτων τῶν ἀντιτύπων τῆς ἀφέσεως τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν καὶ τῆς ζωῆς
αἰωνίου τύχωσιν. Οἱ οὖν ταύτας τὰς προσφορὰς ἐν τῇ ἀναμνήσει
τοῦ Κυρίου ἄγοντες οὐ τοῖς τῶν Ἰουδαίων δόγμασι προσέρχονται,
ἀλλὰ πνευματικῶς λειτουργοῦντες τῆς σοφίας υἱοὶ κληθήσονται.</note>:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>For we offer to God the bread and the cup of
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
blessing, giving thanks to him, because he hath commanded
the earth to bring forth fruits for our use;
and then having performed the offering, we invoke
the Holy Spirit that he would render this sacrifice,
even the bread, the body of Christ, and the cup the
blood of Christ; so that those who partake of these
figures may obtain remission of sins and eternal life.
Those, therefore, who bring these offerings with remembrance
of the Lord, make no approach to the
opinions of the Jews, but, performing a spiritual service,
shall be called children of wisdom.</q>
</p>

<p>
There is something more definite in this passage
than in the allusions in the Treatise against the
Heresies, but the spirit is precisely similar; and it is
remarkable,&mdash;more remarkable than where he is not
professing to give details, that there is no mention
of more than one offering, namely, that of the elements,
which, <emph>and which alone</emph>, are called by the
name of θυσία.
</p>

<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>

<p>
When, however, we come back to the second passage
I have translated, we find one clause<note place='foot'>Judæi autem non offerunt: ... non enim receperunt Verbum
<emph>quod offertur</emph> Deo. See p. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>.</note> in which
there is a various reading, where those which are
acknowledged to be the best MSS. speak of the
Word (i. e. the personal Word, Jesus Christ regarded
especially in his divine nature,) as <emph>offered to God</emph> in
the Eucharist, and the Jews are affirmed to be incapable
of offering the oblation in it because they
did not receive him. Now it is no doubt possible
that Irenæus may have intended to speak of a spiritual
offering up of our Lord with the oblation, i. e.
of an offering of it in and through him; but that is
all that can be implied, for there is no hint whatever
of the repetition of the sacrifice of atonement for
the remission of sins. The <emph>only</emph> offering is before
the invocation of the Holy Ghost; and it is only
after that invocation that the elements are to be
regarded as the body and blood of Christ, capable of
communicating remission of sins. If, therefore, according
to him, there is any offering up of our Lord,
it must be <emph>with</emph> the oblation of the material elements,
to render that thank-offering acceptable.
</p>

<p>
But there is another reading<note place='foot'>&mdash;&mdash;Verbum, <hi rend='italic'>per quod offertur</hi> Deo.</note> which is more consonant
with other passages, and therefore probably
to be preferred; viz. that which represents <q>the
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
Word</q> as the Mediator or Propitiation <emph>through</emph> whom
the oblation is made. We have that idea distinctly
expressed in a former passage<note place='foot'>IV. xvii. 6. Quoniam ergo nomen Filii proprium Patris est,
et in Deo omnipotente per Jesum Christum offert Ecclesia, bene
ait secundum utraque: <q>Et in omni loco incensum offertur
nomini meo et sacrificum purum.</q> Incensa autem Joannes in
Apocalypsi orationes esse ait sanctorum.</note>, in which he speaks,
in reference to this very text of Malachi, of the
Church as offering <emph>through</emph> Jesus Christ; and it is
implied in the Fragment, in which he speaks of our
offering these things <q><emph>with remembrance</emph> (ἐν τῇ ἀναμνήσει)
of the Lord<note place='foot'>Justin Martyr again: (<hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi> 117.) Πάντας οὖν οἳ διὰ τοῦ
ὀνόματος τούτου θυσίας ἅς παρέδωκεν Ἰησοῦς ὁ Χριστὸς γίνεσθαι
[προσφέρουσιν must be introduced either here or further on],
τουτέστιν ἐπὶ τῇ εὐχαριστίᾳ τοῦ ἄρτου καὶ τοῦ ποτηρίου, τὰς ἐν
παντὶ τόπῳ τῆς γῆς γινόμενας ὑπὸ τῶν Χριστιανῶν, προσλαβῶν ὁ
Θεὸς μαρτυρεῖ εὐαρέστους ὑπάρχειν αὐτῷ.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
But whichever reading we take, there is no foundation
for the idea of a propitiatory sacrifice of Christ
under the figure and appearance of the consecrated
elements.
</p>

<p>
Both this latter quotation from the <q><hi rend='italic'>Heresies</hi></q>
and the Fragment are opposed to the notion of any
substantial change in the elements. The former
speaks of the bread after consecration as <q>not common
bread,</q> implying that it is still bread, although
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
adapted to a sacred and mysterious use; and as
<q>consisting of two things, an earthly and a heavenly<note place='foot'>IV. xviii. 5. See p. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, note.</note></q>
(meaning probably the elements themselves and the
body and blood of Christ), whereas the notion of
transubstantiation requires that there should be
nothing of the earthly really left after the consecration.
The fragment still more explicitly calls
them <emph>figures</emph> at the very time that we partake of
them. It is true that the view of Irenæus differs
equally from ordinary Protestant notions, and indeed
is more positive than that of the English Church;
but we are to bear in mind that the Fathers did not
always speak with logical accuracy. Their language
has been brought forward in support of the theory
of transubstantiation, and therefore it has become
necessary to show that they did not write on that
theory. It is not equally requisite that we should
be able to construct a theory which shall explain all
the figurative and imaginative language in which
they expressed their faith in the real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament. Irenæus certainly taught
this doctrine, and that is enough for us of the Church
of England, who do not concern ourselves to explain
the <emph>manner</emph> of his presence. Some of us may
agree with his manner of expressing it, but we
do not require of others that they should agree with
him.
</p>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<p>
We cannot complete our view of the opinions of
Irenæus in regard to the Eucharist without adverting
to his ideas on the <emph>consecration</emph> of the elements.
This he describes in various ways, sometimes attributing
it to <emph>the word of God</emph><note place='foot'>V. ii. 3.</note>, sometimes to <emph>the
invocation of God</emph><note place='foot'>IV. xviii. 5.</note>, sometimes to <emph>the invocation of the
Holy Ghost</emph><note place='foot'>See the <hi rend='italic'>Fragment</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, note 6.</note>. But all these may be reconciled, if
we consider them to be allusions to various portions
of the consecration prayer. There is such a form
left in the <hi rend='italic'>Apostolical Constitutions</hi>, with which all
the four ancient liturgies exhibited by Brett and
Palmer coincide, viz. the Roman, the Oriental, the
Egyptian, and the Gallican. Now all these forms
contain a recital of the words of institution, which
may not unfitly be called <emph>the word of God</emph>, and an
invocation of God to send down his Holy Spirit upon
the gifts, to consecrate them to be the body and
blood of Christ, which may be called either <emph>an invocation
of God</emph> or <emph>an invocation of the Holy Ghost</emph>. Is
it not therefore most probable that Irenæus alludes
to this prayer, which must have been used in very
early ages, for its leading features to be found thus
spread throughout the world? The expressions,
therefore, which he uses, though various and distinct,
are not contrary or contradictory: they allude to
various portions of the same form.
</p>

<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>

<p>
It is worthy of observation, however, that this
attributing of the consecration to these different
things is contrary to the modern doctrine of transubstantiation,
which attributes it to one and one only,
viz. the recital of the words of institution: <hi rend='italic'>This is
my body, This is my blood</hi>.
</p>

<p>
There is another passage which proves that no
transubstantiation was then thought of; viz. the
fragment<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, note 9.</note>, which appears likely to have been a part
of the account of the persecutions at Lyons. We
there read that the heathen tortured the slaves of
some Christians, in order to extort from them something
which might serve as a colour for the severities
they exercised upon them; and that the slaves, <q>not
knowing what to say to please their tormentors,
except what they had heard from their masters, that
the Holy Communion was the blood and body of
Christ, and <emph>thinking</emph> that it was really flesh and
blood, told this to those who were questioning them.</q>
Now it appears very clear that language such as
this could scarcely have been used by a person who
thought that the sacred elements had become really
flesh and blood, which is the doctrine of transubstantiation;
although it might be employed with perfect
consistency by those who believed in a real
mysterious presence of them in the Holy Communion,
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
without any change in the nature of the elements.
</p>

<p>
Massuet<note place='foot'>Diss. III. § 76. See the passage quoted below, p. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>,
note 2.</note> brings forward, in support of the doctrine
of transubstantiation, the fact that the Marcosians
pretended, by magical rites, to effect a
change of the wine into blood. As they professed
to produce a substantial change, he infers that the
Church must have really produced such a change.
But the inference is far from being a sound one; for
as magical rites are invented to pander to the appetite
of the ignorant for something supernatural, so
it is most probable that a pretender of this description,
who wished to set up for something superior
to the clergy, should profess to do something <emph>more</emph>
wonderful than they; that whereas they effected
none but a mystical change, he should pretend to a
literal one. And this no doubt is the history of
transubstantiation. It is the attempt of unspiritual
minds to raise the wonder of the sacred mysteries
to the highest pitch, forgetful meanwhile of the spiritual
objects of them. The doctrine is eminently
a carnal doctrine.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIV. On Justification.</head>

<p>
Those scholastical discussions on the nature of justification
with which we have become familiar had
not arisen when Irenæus wrote, and consequently
we cannot expect him to speak with the precision
to which we are accustomed. Still there are some
principal points upon which, simply following the
Scriptures, he is <emph>practically</emph> clear.
</p>

<p>
He teaches, for instance, that men are not justified
in themselves, but by the coming of Christ<note place='foot'>IV. xxvii. 2. Quemadmodum enim illi (the Patriarchs and
just men of old) non imputabant nobis incontinentias nostras,
quas operati sumus, priusquam Christus in nobis manifestaretur;
sic et nos non est justum imputare ante adventum Christi his qui
peccaverunt. Omnes enim homines egent gloria Dei; justificantur
autem non a semetipsis, sed a Domini adventu, qui intendunt
(probably οἱ κατανοούμενοι; see I. ii. 3, where the Old
Translator renders κατανοήσασαν by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cum intendisset</foreign>) lumen ejus.
Et illis quidem curatio et remissio peccatorum mors Domini fuit.&mdash;In
IV. vi. 5. the opposite to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>intendunt lumen</foreign> is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fugiunt lumen</foreign>.</note>, and
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
more explicitly, by the obedience of Christ<note place='foot'>III. xviii. 7. Oportebat enim eum qui inciperet occidere
(ἀποκτανεῖν μέλλῃ&mdash;occisurus esset) peccatum, et mortis reum
redimere hominem, id ipsum fieri quod erat ille, id est, hominem:
qui a peccato quidem in servitium tractus fuerat, a morte vero
tenebatur, ut peccatum ab homine interficeretur, et homo exiret a
morte. Ὥσπερ γὰρ διὰ τῆς παρακοῆς τοῦ ἑνὸς ἀνθρώπου, τοῦ πρώτως
ἐκ γῆς ἀνεργάστου πεπλασμένου, ἁμαρτωλοὶ κατεστάθησαν οἱ
πολλοὶ, καὶ ἀπέβαλον τὴν ζωήν· οὕτως ἔδει καὶ δι᾽ ὑπακοῆςς ἑνὸς
ἀνθρώπου, τοῦ πρώτως ἐκ παρθένου γεγενημένου, δικαιωθῆναι πολλοὺς
καὶ ἀπολαβεῖν τὴν σωτηρίαν. Sic igitur Verbum Dei homo
factus est.</note>; whence
we may fairly conclude that he would place the
<emph>meritorious cause</emph> of justification in Christ: and as he
connects justification with remission of sins<note place='foot'>IV. xxvii. 2.</note>, and
remission of sins with the cross and death of Christ<note place='foot'>Ibid. et V. xvii. 3. Uti quemadmodum per lignum facti
sumus debitores Deo, per lignum accipiamus nostri debiti remissionem.</note>,
he would no doubt trace our justification to the
death of Christ on the cross.
</p>

<p>
In the same general manner he teaches that faith
justifies man<note place='foot'>IV. v. 5. Propheta ergo cum esset Abraham, et videret in
Spiritu diem adventus Domini et passionis dispositionem, per
quem ipse quoque et omnes qui, similiter ut ipse credidit, credunt
Deo salvari inciperent (σώζεσθαι μέλλωσι&mdash;salvandi essent),
exsultavit vehementer. Non incognitus igitur erat Dominus
Abrahæ, cujus diem concupivit videre: sed neque Pater Domini;
didicerat enim a Verbo Domini, et credidit ei: quapropter et
deputatum est ei ad justitiam a Domino. Fides enim, quæ est
ad Deum altissimum, justificat hominem; et propter hoc dicebat:
<q>Extendam manum meam ad Deum altissimum, qui constituit
cœlum et terram.</q></note>, speaking particularly of Abraham, to
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
whom he attributes faith in Christ. He appears
likewise to express faith, in another passage, by
attending to the light of Christ<note place='foot'>IV. xxvii. 2, supra.</note>; but as the passage
does not exist in the Greek, we cannot be quite
certain what is its real meaning. Now although he
says here that faith justifies, and elsewhere that our
faith is our own<note place='foot'>IV. xxxvii. 5. Et non tantum in operibus sed etiam in fide
liberum et suæ potestatis arbitrium hominis servavit Dominus,
dicens: <q>Secundum fidem tuam fiet tibi;</q> propriam fidem hominis
ostendens, quoniam propriam habet sententiam.</note>, because it springs from our own
will and choice, yet it is plain, from the previous
paragraph, that he simply means that faith is the
<emph>qualification</emph> for justification.
</p>

<p>
Again, where Irenæus says that man is justified
by the moral law, which those who were justified by
faith before the giving of the Law observed<note place='foot'>IV. xiii. 1. See p. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, note 9.</note>; and
again, quoting the text: <q>Offer unto God the sacrifice
of praise, and pay thy vows unto the Most
High; and call upon me in the day of trouble, and
I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me;</q> declares
that God rejected the sacrifices and ceremonies
by which the Jews thought to obtain remission
of sins, and taught them these things (contained
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
in that text) by which man is justified, and draws
nigh to God<note place='foot'>IV. xvii. 1. Deinde ne quis putet, propterea quod irasceretur,
eum recusare hæc (i. e. the sacrifices of the Law), infert, consilium
ei dans: <q>Immola Deo sacrificium laudis et redde Altissimo
vota tua; et invoca me in die tribulationis tuæ, et eripiam
te, et glorificabis me:</q> illa quidem, per quæ putabant peccantes
propitiari Deum, abnuens; hæc autem, per quæ justificatur homo
et appropinquat Deo, hortatur et admonet.&mdash;&mdash;He elsewhere
(IV. vi. 5.) affirms that <q>to believe in Christ is to do his will.</q>
Et ad hoc Filium revelavit Pater, ut per eum omnibus manifestetur,
et eos quidem qui credunt ei justi [justos illos qui ei credunt]
in incorruptionem et in æternum refrigerium recipiat (credere
autem ei est facere ejus voluntatem); eos autem, qui non
credunt, et propter hoc fugiunt lumen ejus, in tenebras quas ipsi
sibi elegerint juste recludet.</note>: in these passages Irenæus no doubt
intends to say nothing more or less than St. James
does where he declares that man is <emph>justified by works</emph>.
If any one regards Irenæus as contradicting the true
doctrine of justification by faith, he must conceive
that St. James equally contradicts it; and the same
considerations which explain St. James will equally
explain Irenæus.
</p>

<p>
I may remark, moreover, in a matter confessedly
not admitting of absolute demonstration, that Irenæus
appears to use justification in what is commonly
called the <emph>forensic</emph> sense, and as taking its date
from the act of the soul, by which it receives and
embraces the divine light, and as being kept up and
renewed by acts of thanksgiving and calling upon
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
God and dependence upon him, and observance of
the moral law. But I have no wish to insist controversially
upon these conclusions.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XV. On Ceremonies, Usages, And Forms Of Words.</head>

<p>
The object of the Great Treatise of Irenæus, which
is almost the whole that remains to us of his writings,
being to refute <emph>doctrinal</emph> error, things of a ceremonial
and ritual nature can be introduced only incidentally.
It is interesting however to trace those fragments
of the external system of the Church which have
dropped from the pen of the writer whilst thinking
chiefly of other matters.
</p>

<p>
We find then that he alludes to the commandments
of God as being ten in number, and as being
divided into two tables<note place='foot'>II. xxiv. 4. Unaquæque tabula, quam accepit a Deo, præcepta
habebat quinque.</note>: but he asserts, conformably
to the opinion of Josephus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> III. vi. 5. Τὰς δύο πλάκας, ἐν αἷς τοὺς δέκα λόγους
συγγεγράφθαι συμβεβήκει, ἀνὰ πέντε μὲν εἰς ἑκατέραν.</note> and Philo<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Decalogo</hi>, cited by Feuardent in loco.</note>, that
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
each table contained <emph>five</emph> commandments. On the
other hand Hesychius<note place='foot'>Cited by Feuardent.</note>, Origen<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.</hi> 8. in cap. xx. Exodi, cited by Massuet in loco.</note>, Ambrose<note place='foot'>Cited by Feuardent.</note>, and
Procopius<note place='foot'>Cited ibid.</note> reckon them as we do. The division
into <emph>three</emph> and <emph>five</emph>, followed by the Roman Church,
does not appear earlier than Augustine<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Quæst.</hi> 71. in Exodum, cited ibid.</note>. There is
however sufficient diversity to prevent our insisting
<emph>much</emph> on our division. It must be observed, however,
that Josephus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> III. v. 5.</note> and (I believe) Philo reckon the
commandments individually exactly as we do, and
not as the Romanists.
</p>

<p>
We have several allusions to the form observed
at the Holy Communion. We find that the cup
contained water mixed with wine<note place='foot'><p>IV. xxxiii. 2. Dominus ... accipiens panem, suum
corpus esse confitebatur, et temperamentum calicis suum sanguinem
confirmavit.
</p>
<p>
V. ii. 3. Καὶ τὸ κεκραμένον ποτήριον καὶ ὁ γεγονὼς ἄρτος ἐπιδέχεται
τὸν λόγον τοῦ Θεοῦ, καὶ γίνεται ἡ εὐχαριστία σῶμα Χριστοῦ·
ἐκ τούτων δὲ αὔξει καὶ συνίσταται ἡ τῆς σαρκὸς ἡμῶν ὑπόστασις.</p></note>; that a form of
invocation was used, which the heretics imitated<note place='foot'>I. xiii. 2. Ποτήρια οἴνῳ κεκραμένα προσποιούμενος εὐχαριστεῖν,
καὶ ἐπὶ πλέον ἐκτείνων τὸν λόγον τῆς ἐπικλήσεως, πορφύρεα
καὶ ἐρυθρὰ ἀναφαίνεσθαι ποιεῖ· (He is speaking of Marcus,
the Gnostic) ὡς δοκεῖν τὴν ἀπὸ τῶν ὑπὲρ τὰ ὅλα Χάριν τὸ αἷμα
τὸ ἑαυτῆς στάζειν ἐν τῷ ἐκείνῳ ποτηρίῳ διὰ τῆς ἐπικλήσεως αὐτοῦ.</note>;
that the term εὐχαριστέω (<emph>to give thanks</emph>) had become
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
technical, and signified <emph>to consecrate</emph><note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>; that the expression
<emph>for ever and ever</emph> occurred in the Eucharistical
form<note place='foot'>I. iii. 1. Ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡμᾶς ἐπὶ τῆς εὐχαριστίας λέγοντας· Εἰς
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων κ. τ. λ.</note>, which shows that a settled form had
become customary in his time; and that Christians
sounded <hi rend='italic'>Amen</hi> all together<note place='foot'>I. xiv. 1.&mdash;&mdash;τὸ Ἀμην ὁμοῦ λεγόντων ἡμῶν κ. τ. λ.</note>. The Eucharist was
sent from one bishop to another, in token of communion
and amity<note place='foot'>Fragm. iii. See p. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, note 4.</note>.
</p>

<p>
We find, too, that the same pharisaical spirit,
which now keeps many from communion, because
others come to it in hypocrisy, had the selfsame
effect in his time<note place='foot'>III. xi. 9. Infelices vere, qui pseudoprophetæ quidem esse
volunt, propheticam vero gratiam repellunt ab ecclesia; similia
patientes his qui, propter eos qui in hypocrisi veniunt, etiam a
fratrum communicatione se abstinent.</note>.
</p>

<p>
There seems, in some of the practices of the
Gnostics, to have been an imitation of the <emph>anointing</emph>
at baptism or confirmation practised in the Church<note place='foot'>I. xxi. 3. Καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ἐπιλέγουσιν οἱ αὐτοὶ τελοῦντες· ὁ
δὲ τετελεσμένος ἀποκρίνεται· Ἐστήριγμαι καὶ λελύτρωμαι κ. τ. λ.&mdash;Ἔπειτα
μυρίζουσι τὸν τετελεσμένον τῷ ὀπῷ τῷ ἀπὸ βαλσάμου·
τὸ γὰρ μῦρον τοῦτο τύπον τῆς ὑπὲρ τὰ ὅλα εὐωδίας εἶναι λέγουσιν.</note>.
</p>

<p>
There are several allusions to the practice of public
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
<emph>confession and penance</emph>, as a customary and established
part of discipline. In some cases it was
voluntary<note place='foot'>I. xiii. 5. Ὅτι δὲ φίλτρα καὶ ἀγώγιμα, πρὸς τὸ καὶ τοῖς σώμασιν
αὐτῶν ἐνυβρέζειν, ἐμποιεῖ οὗτος ὁ Μάρκος ἐνίαις τῶν γυναικῶν,
εἰ καὶ μὴ πάσαις, αὗται πολλάκις ἐπιστρέψασαι εἰς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν
τοῦ Θεοῦ ἐξωμολογήσαντο, καὶ κατὰ τὸ σῶμα ἠχρειῶσθαι ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ,
καὶ ἐρωτικῶς πάνυ αὐτὸν πεφιληκέναι· ὥστε καὶ διακονόν τινα τῶν
ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ τῶν ἡμετέρων, ὑποδεξάμενον αὐτὸν εἰς τὸν οἶκον αὐτοῦ,
περιπεσεῖν ταῦτῃ τῇ συμφορᾷ, τῆς γυναικὸς αὐτοῦ εὐειδοῦς ὑπαρχούσης,
καὶ τὴν γνώμην καὶ τὸ σῶμα διαφθαρείσης ὑπὸ τοῦ μάγου
τούτου, καὶ ἐξακολουθησάσης αὐτῷ πολλῷ τῷ χρίνῳ. ἔπειτα, μετὰ
πολλοῦ κόπου τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἐπιστρεψάντων, αὐτὴ τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον
ἐξομολογουμένη διετέλεσε, πενθοῦσα καὶ θρηνοῦσα ἐφ᾽ ἡ ἔπαθεν
ὑπὸ τοῦ μάγου διαφθορᾷ.&mdash;&mdash;III. iv. 3. Κέρδων δὲ ὁ πρὸ Μαρκίωνος,
καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπὶ Ὕγίνου, ὃς ἦν ἔνατος ἐπίσκοπος, εἰς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν
ἐλθὼν, καὶ ἐξομολογούμενος, οὕτως διετέλεσε, ποτὲ μὲν
λαθροδιδασκαλῶν, ποτὲ δὲ πάλιν ἐξομολογούμενος, ποτὲ δὲ ἐλενχόμενος
ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἐδίδασκε κακῶς, καὶ ἀφιστάμενος τῆς τῶν ἀδελφῶν
συνοδίας.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It was the established custom not to kneel in
prayer on the Lord's day, or during the whole season
from Easter to Whitsuntide, which was called Pentecost<note place='foot'>Fragm. vii. Τὸ δὲ ἐν Κυριακῇ μὴ κλίνειν γόνυ, σύμβολόν
ἐστι τῆς ἀναστάσεως, δι᾽ ἧς τῇ τοῦ Χριστοῦ χάριτι, τῶν τε ἁμαρτημάτων
καὶ τοῦ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν τεθανατωμένου θανάτου ἠλευθερώθημεν.
Ἐκ τῶν ἀποστολικῶν δὲ χρόνων ἡ τοιαύτη συνήθεια ἔλαβε τὴν
ἀρχήν· καθώς φήσιν ὁ μακάριος Εἰρηναῖος, ὁ μάρτυρ καὶ ἐπίσκοπος
Λουγδούνου, ἐν τῷ περὶ τοῦ Πάσχα λόγῳ· ἐν ᾦ μέμνηται καὶ περὶ
τῆς Πεντηκοστῆς, ἐν ᾗ οὐ κλίνομεν γόνυ, ἐπειδὴ ἰσοδυναμεῖ τῇ
ἡμέρᾳ τῆς Κυριακῆς, κατὰ τὴν ῥηθεῖσαν περὶ αὐτῆς αἰτίαν. This
is a quotation from the <hi rend='italic'>Quæstiones et Responsiones ad Orthodoxos</hi>,
formerly attributed to Justin Martyr, § 115. We learn
from Basil the great, (<hi rend='italic'>de Spiritu Sancto</hi>, 27.) that the whole
space from Easter to Whitsunday was called <hi rend='italic'>Pentecost</hi>.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>

<p>
A fast before Easter was generally observed, but was
of unequal duration, according to the choice of those
who observed it<note place='foot'>Frag. iii. Οὐ γὰρ μόνον περὶ τῆς ἡμέρας ἐστιν ἡ ἀμφισβήτησις,
ἀλλὰ καὶ περὶ τοῦ εἴδους αὐτοῦ τῆς νηστείας· οἱ μὲν γὰρ
οἴονται μίαν ἡμέραν δεῖν αὐτοὺς νηστεύειν· οἱ δὲ δύο, οἱ δὲ καὶ
πλείονας· οἱ δὲ τεσσαράκοντα ὥρας ἡμερινάς τε καὶ νυκτερινὰς
συμμετροῦσι τὴν ἡμάραν αὐτῶν. Καὶ τοιαύτη μὲν ποικιλία τῶν ἐπιτηρούντων,
οὐ νῦν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν γεγονυῖα, ἀλλὰ καὶ πολὺ πρότερον
ἐπὶ τῶν πρὸ ἡμῶν, τῶν παρὰ τὸ ἀκριβὲς, ὡς εἰκὸς, κρατούντων,
τὴν καθ᾽ ἀπλότητα καὶ ἰδιωτισμὸν συνήθειαν εἰς τὸ μετάπειτα
πεποιηκότων. καὶ οὐδὲν ἔλαττον πάντες οὗτοι εἰρήνευσάν τε, καὶ
εἰρηνεύομεν πρὸς ἀλλήλους· καὶ ἡ διαφωνία τῆς νηστείας τὴν
ὀμόνοιαν τῆς πίστεως συνίστησι.</note>. The passage of Irenæus has been
introduced into the great controversy between those
who assert the apostolical antiquity of the forty days'
season of abstinence, and those who deny it. In
this country our great divines have taken different
sides; Beveridge<note place='foot'><p>Beverigii <hi rend='italic'>Annotationes in Canones Apostolicos</hi>. In Can. lxix.
</p>
<p>
Τὴν ἁγίαν τεσσαρακοστήν.
</p>
<p>
Codices quibus usus est Valesius, eodem modo, quo nos jam
transcripsimus, legunt atque interpungunt.... Et huic
quidem lectioni favit Σύνοψις τῆς εὐαγγελικῆς ἱστορίας, in quam
Beatus Rhenanus in præf. ad Ruffinum se incidisse refert, ubi
hæc Irenæi verba sic citantur, seu potius explicantur: Οἱ μὲν
γὰρ μίαν μόνον ἡμέραν ἐνήστευον, οἱ δὲ δύο, οἱ δὲ πλείονας· οἱ δὲ
μʹ ὥρας μόνας ἡμερινὰς καὶ νυκτερινὰς, ὥραν ἀντὶ ἡμέρας, νηστεύοντες.
Quod etiam observatum est a doctissimo nostro Petro
Gunning jam episcopo Cicestriensi in appendice ad tractatum de
paschali jejunio. Verum multa sunt quæ huic lectioni refragantur.
Ut alia omittam, quis miri hujus jejunii quadraginta
horis commensurati, e veteribus præsertim, meminit? Quadraginta
dierum jejunio nihil in antiquis scriptoribus frequentius
occurrit; at de quadraginta horarum jejunio altum iis silentium.
Porro aliud quoque in his verbis, sic interpunctis, æque si non
magis inauditum observare licet, <emph>diem</emph> viz. <emph>quadraginta horis
diurnis ac nocturnis commensuratum</emph>. Quo nihil absurdius excogitari
potest: ac proinde Valesius pro ἡμέραν substituendum
putat νηστείαν, ut non dies, sed jejunium quadraginta horis commensuretur.
Hanc autem violenter introductam verborum commutationem
contra unanimem omnium codicum consensum docti
nunquam admittent; præcipue cum e verbis ipsis, ut in omnibus
codicibus leguntur, et in nonnullis distinguuntur, verior et ecclesiæ
primitivæ ritibus magis consonus sensus elucescat: nimirum
Johannes Christophorsonus et Henricus Savilius hunc Irenæi
locum sic distinxerunt; ... τεσσαράκοντα. ὥρας τε ἡμερινὰς
καὶ νυκτερινὰς συμμετροῦσι τὴν ἡμέραν αὐτῶν. Sic etiam legit et
distinxit olim Ruffinus, qui sic vertit: <q>Quidam enim putant
uno tantum die observari debere jejunium, alii duobus, alii
vero pluribus, nonnulli etiam quadraginta; ita ut horas diurnas
nocturnasque computantes diem statuant.</q> Quibus verbis nihil
aliud indigitatur, quam quod hi uno, illi duobus, alii pluribus,
nonnulli etiam quadraginta diebus jejunarunt; omnes autem
unamquamque diem, quam jejunii peregerunt, per nocturnas
æque ac diurnas horas emensi sunt; ut nulla hora vel diei vel
noctis, usque ad numeri dierum, quos sibi constituerant, exitum,
jejunium solverent. Contra hanc expositionem H. Valesius duo
objicit: primo, quod hinc necessario consequetur, eos qui xl dies
jejunabant, toto illo tempore nihil prorsus comedisse, quando
quidem horas tam diurnas quam nocturnas jejunio deputabant.
Respondeo, nihil minus quam hoc ex dicta expositione consequi:
in jejuniis enim celebrandis, præsertim hoc paschali, non ab
omni prorsus alimento, ut cuique notum est, sed a carnibus tantum
vel aliis fortasse nonnullis ciborum generibus abstinebant;
at reliquis vesci licebat. Hoc egregie confirmatur ex concil.
Laod. can. 50, quo dicitur δεῖ πᾶσαν τὴν τεσσαρακοστὴν νηστεύειν
ξηροφαγοῦντας. Hic enim per totam quadragesimam, ac proinde
nocturnas æque ac diurnas horas, jejunare præcipitur; et tamen
aridis vesci permittitur; vel potius per istius modi ξηροφαγίαν,
sive aridorum esum, totum hoc quadragesimale jejunium celebrari
constituitur. Alterum, quod objicit, est, quod cum Irenæus
dixerit, alios uno die, alios biduo, alios vero pluribus diebus
jejunare, quid necesse est addere alios 40 dies jejunare, cum in
eo quod plures dies dixit, quadraginta satis comprehendantur.
Respondeo, quod etiamsi nonnullos plures quam duos dies jejunare
dixerat, non tamen superfluum erat, eorum etiam, qui xl
dies jejunabant, mentionem facere. Cum enim a minimo jejunio,
viz. unius diei, inceperit, quidni in maximum quoque expresse
desineret, ut maximus viz. dierum numerus, quem quispiam in
jejuniis observabat, æque ac minimus innotesceret?</p></note>, Patrick<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Of Fasting in Lent</hi>, ch. xvi. p. 143.</note>, and Hooper<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Discourse of Lent</hi>, Part I. ch. 3.</note> upholding
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
it, and Morton<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Catholick Appeal</hi>, II. 24. p. 304.</note>, Taylor<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ductor Dubitantium</hi>, III. 4. p. 631.</note>, and Bingham<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Antiquities</hi>, XXI. i. 2.</note> denying
it. This passage might appear to be decisive,
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
if we could be sure of the punctuation, but unhappily
Ruffinus pointed it differently from all the
MSS. of Eusebius and, I believe, Nicephorus: for
he introduces a stop after τεσσαράκοντα, which makes
Irenæus distinctly affirm that in his time some fasted
forty <emph>days</emph>, whereas the common reading makes them
fast only forty successive <emph>hours</emph><note place='foot'>Post τεσσαράκοντα interpungunt Christophorsonus, Savilius,
Strothius, præeunte Ruffino, nulla codicum auctoritate. Totum
locum οἱ δὲ ... αὐτῶν uno tenore sine interpunctura legunt
C. F. Virgulam post οἱ δὲ, item post νυκτερινὰς, ponunt Steph.
A: eandem post ὥρας ponunt B. D. Nicephorus μʹ pro τεσσαράκοντα
legit, quod alterutri interpretationi favere posset:&mdash;τε post
ἡμερινὰς om. Steph. Stroth. A. E:&mdash;αἷς post νυκτερινὰς add.
M. Grut. Cast.&mdash;ὥρας τε legit c.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Burton</hi> in loco, in the last
Oxford edition of Eusebius.&mdash;&mdash;C. and E. are of the tenth
century.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>

<p>
It would be impossible to do <emph>justice</emph> to the subject
without entering fully into the arguments on both
sides; and therefore I will confine myself to an observation
or two on the text of Irenæus. Let us then
look at the passage according to the two methods of
punctuation; and we shall find Irenæus affirming
according to <emph>one</emph> that those who fasted any number
of days, from one to forty, reckoned the hours both
of day and of night into their day; or according to
<emph>the other</emph> that some fasted one day, some two, some
more; and that some reckoned forty hours of day
and night into their day. Now that any persons
could fast forty successive days, both day and night,
abstaining from food all the time, cannot be imagined:
and if they did not abstain from food all the
time of their fast, the mention of its continuance
day and night would be unmeaning.
</p>

<p>
To this argument the reply of Beveridge, as may
be seen in note 3, is, that no fast was kept strictly
throughout the twenty-four hours by <emph>total</emph> abstinence
from food: and he quotes the 50th Canon of Laodicea
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
to show that the Lent fast was nothing more
than abstaining from flesh, &amp;c. and living upon dry
food. But, with deference to so great a name,
this is but begging the question. The Canon of
Laodicea only shows what <emph>the Church required</emph>, not
what individuals practised. And Grabe<note place='foot'>Οἱ μὲν γὰρ οἴονται, &amp;c. Similiter Sæc. III. Dionysius
Alexandrinus de jejunii Ante-Paschalis differentia scripsit in
Epistola ad Basilidem. Μηδὲ τὰς ἒξ τῶν νηστείων ἡμέρας ἴσως,
μηδὲ ὁμοίως πάντες διαμένουσιν· ἀλλ᾽ οἱ μὲν καὶ πάσας ὑπερτιθέασιν,
ἄσιτοι διατελοῦντες, οἱ δὲ δύο, οἱ δὲ τρεῖς, οἱ δὲ τέσσαρας, οἱ
δὲ οὐδεμίαν. Et Epiphanius in Expositione fidei Catholicæ,
libris contra Hæreses subnexa, postquam de jejunio quartæ et
sextæ feriæ, et Quadragesimali dixerat, ad jejunium Ante-Paschale,
quod in Canonibus Timothei Alexandrini vocatur, ἡ νηστεία
τοῦ πάσχα, progreditur, aitque fideles per hebdomadam
Pascha præcedentem solo pane et aqua vesci ad vesperam, et
addit: Ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ σπουδαῖοι διπλᾶς καὶ τριπλᾶς καὶ τετραπλᾶς
ὑπερτιθέασι, καὶ ὅλην τὴν ἑβδομάδα τινὲς ἄχρις ἀλεκτρυόνων κλανγῆς
τῆς Κυριακῆς ἐπιφωσκούσης. In quibus ὑπέρθεσις et νηστεία
distinguuntur: et jejunare quidem dicuntur, qui post abstinentiam
totius diei vespere tenui fruuntur cibo; ὑπερτιθέναι
vero, qui nec vespera ullam sumunt refectionem, sed omnino
abstinent, sive una, sive pluribus diebus, usque ad terminum
jejunii, Paschale scilicet mane, quod a galli cantu incipit.</note> (on this
passage) has proved that there were anciently two
kinds of strict fasts observed in the last week of
Lent; one of abstinence from all food till the evening,
and then eating nothing but bread and salt
accompanied with pure water; the other, practised
by the more zealous, of <emph>holding over</emph> one, two, three,
four, or six days, till the cock-crowing on Easterday.
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
Both Grabe and Bingham<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Antiquities</hi>, XXI. i. 25.</note> agree (what indeed
appears self-evident) that there is no meaning in
words, if these persons did not remain in total abstinence
during this whole time; for what extraordinary
zeal could there be in their practice, if they
broke their fast in the evening, as others did.
</p>

<p>
If, on the other hand, we suppose the fast to have
been one of forty <emph>hours</emph>, commencing from the hour
in which Jesus gave up the ghost, and terminating
with that of his resurrection, there is then a sufficient
reason for mentioning that the fast continued
day and night; it becomes a thing within the reach
of probability; and the period is a very natural one
for those persons to choose who felt themselves
equal to it. At the time in which the <hi rend='italic'>Apostolical
Constitutions</hi> were written, it was enjoined on
Christians<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Constit. Apost.</hi> V. 18. Τὴν παρασκευὴν καὶ τὸ σάββατον ὀλόκληρον
νηστεύσατε, οἷς δύναμις πρόσεστι τοιαύτη, μηδενὸς γευόμενοι
μέχρις ἀλεκτοροφωνίας νυκτός· εἰ δὲ τις ἀδυνατεῖ τὰς δύο
συνάπτειν ὁμοῦ, φυλασσέσθω κᾂν τὸ σάββατον.</note> to fast the Friday and Saturday, if possible;
if not, at least on the Saturday: and in either
case it appears that they were not to break their fast
till the first cock-crowing; i. e. in all probability,
on Easter day.
</p>

<p>
Leaving, then, other sources of controversy on
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
either side, the text itself appears to supply the
strongest evidence in favour of the punctuation of
the MSS. How that of Ruffinus arose, we are not
absolutely concerned to say: but when the practice
of the more lengthened fast had become established
in the Church, it might easily lead to understanding
the words of Irenæus in such a manner as to give it
primitive authority.
</p>

<p>
But even supposing the fast of forty <emph>days</emph> to have
been kept by <emph>some</emph> persons in the age of St. Ignatius,
this does not prove that practice to have originated
in the apostles, as Irenæus gives equally high authority
for the shorter fasts of one, two, or several days.
All, therefore, that would be proved by the language
of Irenæus (taking it in this sense) is that in the
time of Ignatius a fast was kept before Easter, and
that Christians were left to their own discretion as
to the length of it. Chrysostom indeed expressly
says<note place='foot'>Chrysost. <hi rend='italic'>Contra Judæos</hi>, III. § 4. p. 611. Τίνος οὖν ἕνεκεν
νηστεύομέν, φησι, τὰς τεσσαράκοντα ταύτας ἡμέρας; Πολλοὶ τὸ
παλαιὸν τοῖς μυστηρίοις προσῄεσαν ἁπλῶς καὶ ὡς ἔτυχε, καὶ μάλιστα
κατὰ τὸν καιρὸν τοῦτον, καθ᾽ ὃν ὁ Χριστὸς αὐτὰ παρέδωκε.
Συνειδότες οὖν οἱ πατέρες τὴν βλάβην τὴν γινομένην ἐκ τῆς ἠμελημένης
προσόδου, συνελθόντες ἐτύπωσαν ἡμέρας τεσσαράκοντα
νηστείαις, εὐχῶν, ἀκροάσεως, συνόδων· ἵν᾽ ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ταύταις
καθαρθέντες μετ᾽ ἀκριβείας ἅπαντες καὶ δι᾽ εὐχῶν, καὶ δι᾽ ἐλεημοσύνης,
καὶ διὰ νηστείας, καὶ διὰ παννυχίδων, καὶ διὰ δακρύων, καὶ δι᾽
ἐξομολογήσεως, καὶ διὰ τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων, οὕτω κατὰ δύναμιν
τὴν ἡμετέραν μετὰ καθαροῦ συνειδότος προσίωμεν.</note>, that the fast of forty days was not ordained
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
until the mass of Christians had come to communicate
only on Easter day, and that without suitable
devotion, and that the fast and other devotional
exercises were appointed, to prepare them for the
Communion on Easter day.
</p>

<p>
Very little more remains to be observed under
this head.
</p>

<p>
Irenæus likewise is, I believe, the first writer who
uses the term παροικία to signify the district under
the superintendence of a bishop<note place='foot'>Fragm. iii. See p. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, note 4.</note>. And it is interesting
that the selfsame term which we now use
to distinguish ourselves from separatists was in use
in his age, namely, that of <emph>Churchmen</emph><note place='foot'>III. xv. 2. Hi enim ad multitudinem, propter eos qui sunt
ab ecclesia, quos communes ecclesiasticos ipsi dicunt, inferunt
sermones per quos capiunt simpliciores.</note>. And that
was perfectly natural, for the <emph>Church</emph> had a name
from the beginning, but its attribute of <emph>Catholicism</emph>
or Universality, as distinguished from the confined
locality of schisms and heresies, was not observed
till afterwards; and therefore the name of <emph>Catholic</emph>
was posterior to that of <emph>Churchman</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVI. On The Sabbath.</head>

<p>
One of the greatest difficulties to modern readers in
the history of the primitive Church is the state of
feeling and opinion on the subject of the Sabbath.
We have been in the habit of arguing from the
primitive institution of a holy day (which we have
called a sabbath), and of viewing the Lord's day as
answering to it; and if we may judge by the language
of the earliest writers, they did not consider
the Lord's day as intended to be a sabbath in itself,
although some of them regarded it as being appointed
instead of the Sabbath<note place='foot'>Bingham, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquities</hi>, XX. ii. 3. <q>St. Austin, or whoever was
the author of the <hi rend='italic'>Sermons de Tempore</hi>, (<hi rend='italic'>Hom.</hi> 251, <hi rend='italic'>de Tempore</hi>,
T. 10, p. 307.) says, <q>The Apostles transferred the observation
of the Sabbath to the Lord's day.</q></q>&mdash;&mdash;Clement of Alexandria
gives indications of the same idea, where he says that <q>to all
appearance the eighth day is likely to become the proper seventh
day, and the seventh the sixth; so that the former will be
the proper sabbath, and the seventh a working day.</q>&mdash;Κινδυνεύει
γὰρ ἡ μὲν ὀγδοὰς ἑβδομάς εἶναι κυρίως, ἑξὰς δὲ ἡ ἑβδομὰς
κατά γε τὸ ἐμφανές· καὶ ἡ μὲν κυρίως εἶναι σάββατον, ἐργάτις
δὲ ἡ ἑβδομάς.</note>. Irenæus certainly
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
viewed the institution of the Sabbath as entirely
Mosaical, and thought that Abraham and the patriarchs
before the Law did not keep it<note place='foot'>IV. xvi. 2. See p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 4. See also Justin Martyr,
<hi rend='italic'>Dial. cum Tryph.</hi> 19. 27. 43.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It must not, however, be thence hastily concluded
that he believed that Abraham and the patriarchs
knew nothing of the seventh day as a day of divine
worship. The primary and leading idea of a <emph>sabbath</emph>,
properly so called, is (not <emph>holiness</emph> but) <emph>rest</emph>;
that is, abstinence from any employment that can be
construed into labour. Now Irenæus might very
well deny that the Patriarchs kept a day of rest
from all employment, without in any degree intending
to deny that they devoted the seventh day
especially to religious worship.
</p>

<p>
An illustration of my meaning will be found in
the admission of Justin Martyr, that Christians did
not keep the Sabbath<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dial. cum Tryph.</hi> 10. He represents Tryphon charging the
Christians with neglecting circumcision, the feasts, and the sabbath;
which charge he admits, and argues against the necessity of
them.</note>, coupled with the well-ascertained
fact<note place='foot'>Bingham's <hi rend='italic'>Antiquities</hi>, XX. iii. 1.</note>, that a very large proportion of them
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
indeed were in the habit of attending divine service
on the seventh day. Perhaps a still closer illustration
is seen in the Canons of the Council of Laodicea,
which expressly forbid Christians to keep the
Sabbath like Jews<note place='foot'>Can. 29. Ὅτι οὐ δεῖ Χριστιανοὺς Ἰουδαΐζειν, καὶ ἐν τῷ
σαββάτῳ σχολάζειν, ἀλλὰ ἐργάζεσθαι αὐτοὺς ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ ἡμέρᾳ·
τὴν δὲ Κυριακὴν προτιμῶντες, εἴγε δύναιντο, σχολάζειν ὡς Χριστιανοί.
εἰ δὲ εὑρεθεῖεν Ἰουδαïσταὶ, ἔστωσαν ἀνάθεμα παρὰ Χριστῷ.</note>, and at the same time direct
the Eucharistic offering to be made on that day as
well as on the Lord's day<note place='foot'>Can. 49. Ὅτι οὐ δεῖ τῇ τεσσαρακοστῇ ἄρτον προσφέρειν, εἰ μὴ
ἐν Σαββάτῳ καὶ Κυριακῇ μόνον.</note>. If then many of the
early Christians devoted a portion of the Saturday
statedly to public religious exercises, and yet did not
consider themselves as keeping a sabbath, it would
be very unsafe to infer from the assertion that the
Patriarchs did not keep the Sabbath, that therefore
they had no day of religious worship. In fact it
seems scarcely possible that the division and numbering
of the days by sevens could have been kept
up, as we know it was<note place='foot'>Gen. viii. 10. 12. xxix. 27.</note>, before the giving of the
Law, without some religious observance connected
with it.
</p>

<p>
Although, then, Irenæus did not regard the Mosaical
Sabbath as being observed before the giving of
the Law, and consequently regarded it as abolished
with the Law, yet as he has asserted that the moral
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
law or decalogue was observed before Moses, and
implies that <emph>we</emph> are not at liberty to reject it<note place='foot'>See pp. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</note>, it is
very certain that he must have conceived the fourth
commandment to be in some sense or other a directory
to Christians: and it may therefore be inquired
what he conceived ought to be learnt from it.
This may in some degree be gathered from his saying
that the Sabbath, like the whole Jewish Law,
was symbolical, and that it was intended to teach
men to serve God every day, and to typify the
kingdom of God, when whosoever has persevered
in godliness shall partake of his table<note place='foot'>IV. xvi. 1. Hoc idem de sabbatis Ezechiel Propheta ait:
<q>Et sabbata mea dedi eis, ut sint in signo inter me et ipsos, ut
sciant quoniam ego Dominus, qui sanctifico eos.</q> Et in Exodo
Deus ait ad Moysem: <q>Et sabbata mea observabitis: erit enim
signum apud me vobis in generationes vestras.</q> In signo ergo
data sunt hæc: non autem sine symbolo erant signa, id est, sine
argumento, neque otiosa, tanquam quæ a sapiente Artifice darentur;
sed secundum carnem circumcisio circumcisionem significabat
spiritalem. Etenim <q>nos,</q> ait Apostolus, <q>circumcisi sumus
circumcisione non manufacta.</q> Et Propheta ait: <q>Circumcidite
duritiam cordis vestri.</q> Sabbata autem perseverantiam totius
diei [i. e. <emph>omni tempore</emph>. See below] erga Deum deservitionis edocebant.
<q>Æstimati enim sumus,</q> ait Apostolus Paulus, <q>tota
die ut oves occisionis;</q> scilicet consecrati, et ministrantes omni
tempore fidei nostræ, et perseverantes ei, et abstinentes ab omni
avaritia, non acquirentes, nec possidentes thesauros in terra.
Manifestabatur autem et tanquam de [post] ea quæ facta sunt
requietio Dei; hoc est, Regnum, in quo requiescens homo ille
qui perseveraverit Deo adsistere, participabit de mensa Dei.</note>. For he
believed that the world was destined to endure in
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
its present state as many thousands of years as the
days of creation, and that then God's kingdom would
be set up on earth<note place='foot'>V. xxviii. 3. Ὅσαις enim ἡμέραις ἐγένετο ὁ κόσμος, τοσαύταις
χιλιοντάσι συντελεῖται. καὶ διὰ τοῦτό φησιν ἡ γραφή· Καὶ συνετελέσθησαν
ὁ οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ, καὶ πᾶς ὁ κόσμος αὐτῶν. καὶ συνετέλεσεν
ὁ Θεὸς τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ εʹ τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ ἅ ἐποίησε, καὶ κατάπαυσεν
ὁ Θεὸς ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ ζʹ ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν ἔργων αὐτοῦ.
Τοῦτο δ᾽ ἔστι τῶν προγεγονότων διήγησις, καὶ τῶν ἐσομένων προφητεία.
ἡ γὰρ ἡμέρα Κυρίου ὡς α͵ ἔτη· ἐν ἓξ οὖν ἡμέραις συντετελέσται
τὰ γεγονότα· φανερὸν οὖν, ὅτι ἡ συντέλεια αὐτῶν τὸ δ͵
ἔτος ἐστίν. See the Epistle of Barnabas, § 11. quoted p. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</note>, which will be the true sabbath
of the just<note place='foot'>V. xxviii. 2. Referring to Luke xiv. 12, 13, and Matt. xix.
29, he says, <q>Hæc sunt in Regni temporibus, hoc est, in septima
die quæ est sanctificata, in qua requievit Deus ab omnibus operibus
quæ fecit; quæ est verum justorum sabbatum; in qua non
facient omne terrenum opus, sed adjacentem habebunt paratam
mensam a Deo, pascentem eos epulis omnibus.</q></note>. But he regarded our Lord's apparent
relaxation of the stringency of the sabbath, not as a
<emph>direct</emph> instruction to Christians, but as an explanation
of the proper meaning of the fourth commandment
as addressed to the Jews<note place='foot'>IV. viii. 2. Manifestum est igitur, quoniam eos qui similiter
ut Abraham credebant ei, solvit et vivificavit, nihil extra Legem
faciens, curans in die sabbatorum. Non enim prohibebat Lex
curari homines sabbatis, quæ et circumcidebat eos in hac die, et
pro populo jubebat ministeria Sacerdotibus perficere; sed et mutorum
animalium curationem non prohibebat. Et Siloa etiam
sæpe sabbatis curavit: et propter hoc assidebant ei multi die
sabbatorum. Continere enim jubebat eos Lex ab omni opere
servili, id est, ab omni avaritia, quæ per negotiationem, et reliquo
terreno actu agitur: animæ autem opera, quæ fiunt per
sententiam et sermones bonos, in auxilium eorum qui proximi
sunt, adhortabatur fieri. Et propter hoc Dominus arguebat eos,
qui injuste exprobrabant ei, quia sabbatis curabat. Non enim
solvebat, sed adimplebat Legem, summi Sacerdotis operam perficiens,
propitians pro hominibus Deum, et emundans leprosos,
infirmos curans, et ipse moriens, uti exsiliatus homo exiret de
condemnatione, et reverteretur intrepide ad suam hæreditatem.&mdash;3.
Sed et esurientes accipere sabbatis escam ex his quæ adjacebant,
non vetabat Lex: metere autem et colligere in horreum
vetabat. Et ideo Dominus his, qui incusabant discipulos ejus,
quoniam vellentes spicas manducabant, dixit: <q>Nec hoc legistis,
quod fecit David, cum esurisset, quemadmodum introivit in domum
Dei, et panes propositionis manducavit, et dedit eis qui
cum eo erant, quos non licebat manducare, nisi solis Sacerdotibus?</q>
per Legis verba suos discipulos excusans, et significans
licere Sacerdotibus libere agere. Sacerdos autem scitus fuerat
David apud Deum, quamvis Saul persequutionem faceret ei.
Πᾶς enim βασιλεὺς δίκαιος ἱερατικὴν ἔχει τάξιν. Sacerdotes autem
sunt omnes Domini Apostoli, qui neque agros, neque domos
hæreditant hic, sed semper altari et Deo serviunt.... Et
Sacerdotes in Templo sabbatum prophanabant, et rei non erant.
Quare ergo rei non erant? Quia cum essent in Templo, non
sæcularia sed Dominica perficiebant ministeria, Legem adimplentes,
non autem prætereuntes Legem, quemadmodum is qui a
semetipso arida ligna attulit in castra Domini; qui et juste
lapidatus est.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>

<p>
I think it would appear from these passages that
Irenæus was not in the habit of regarding the Christian
practice of hallowing the Lord's day as the explicit
fulfilment of the fourth commandment. He
lived so near the apostolical times that he no doubt
observed it in obedience to Christ's institution, without
considering whether it was contemplated by the
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
original institution of a holy day or not. But in
common with other Christian writers, he did not
think that the fulfilment of the fourth commandment
lay in devoting any particular portion of time
to the service of God; but in serving him continually
as much as possible; and therefore, as a matter
of course, in observing those times of sacred
repose and divine worship which either the institution
of Christ, or the common custom of Christians,
or the rules of the Church, might have appointed<note place='foot'>We have various indications of the observance of the Lord's
day in early writers. Thus Ignatius (<hi rend='italic'>Ad Magnes.</hi> 9.) speaks of
<q>the ancient prophets leading lives in harmony with the Lord's
day.</q> Μηκέτι σαββατίζοντες, ἀλλὰ κατὰ Κυριακὴν ζωὴν ζῶντες,
ἐν ᾗ καὶ ἡ ζωὴ ἡμῶν ἀνέτειλεν δι᾽ αὐτοῦ. Here there is an evident
allusion to <emph>some</emph> way in which that day was spent, in contradistinction
to the Jewish Sabbath.&mdash;The Epistle of Barnabas,
written not far from Apostolical times, speaks of it as a festival:
Ἀγομεν τὴν ἡμέραν τὴν ὀγδόην εἰς εὐφροσύνην, ἐν ᾗ καὶ ὁ Ἰησοῦς
ἀνέστη ἐκ νεκρῶν.&mdash;Justin Martyr, again, (<hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> II. 67.) describes
the practice of assembling for instruction, worship, and communion
on that day, and affirms that our Lord, when he appeared
to his disciples on Easter day, taught them to observe the day in
this manner. Καὶ τῇ μετὰ τὴν Κρονικὴν, ἥτις ἐστιν Ἡλίου ἡμέρα,
φανεὶς τοῖς ἀποστόλοις αὐτοῦ καὶ μαθηταῖς, ἐδίδαξε ταῦτα.&mdash;A
little later Dionysius of Corinth speaks of <q>celebrating the
Lord's holy day.</q> Τὴν σήμερον οὖν Κυριακὴν ἁγίαν ἡμέραν διηγάγομεν.&mdash;So
Clement, as I showed above (p. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, note 1),
informs us that in his time the Lord's day appeared likely to
be regarded as the proper sabbath.&mdash;Further on we find the
Council of Laodicea (see p. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, note 5) directing Christians to rest
by preference on the Lord's day, and not on the Sabbath.&mdash;Finally,
we may see in Bingham (<hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> XX. ii. 2, 3, 4.) how,
as Christianity became established, business, labour, and public
sports were forbidden by public authority; which proves of course
what had been the practice of Christians themselves before their
religion obtained the sanction of the civil power.</note>.
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
According to such a feeling, therefore, whilst <emph>no</emph> particular
portion of time would be kept with Jewish
superstition, as though it were an end of itself, whatever
time was kept would be <emph>so</emph> kept as to ensure
the ends proposed by its observance.
</p>

<p>
And, if we revert to what has been before observed
as to Irenæus's view of the law of liberty, we
shall see that he would be so far from supposing that
this Christian freedom authorized us to dispense with
devoting one day in seven to God's service, that he
would feel that it ought to lead those who had it in
their power to devote even a larger portion. And
such in fact was the practice of the Christians of
those times. They assembled together not only on
the morning and evening of the Sunday, but also
throughout the east on the morning and evening of
Saturday, and on the morning of Wednesday and
Friday. When, therefore, there was so much zeal
for the service of God, and the commandment was
kept so amply in its spirit without thinking of the
letter of it,&mdash;the warm feeling of Christians making
them a law to themselves,&mdash;there was nothing to
lead them to inquire critically how much the commandment
actually required of them; and to have
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
instituted such an inquiry would have appeared like
putting a restriction upon the ardour of Christian
love, and returning to the spirit of the Law of
Moses.
</p>

<p>
The true question, then, to ask is, <emph>not</emph> why the
first Christians did not put the Lord's day upon the
footing of the paradisiacal sabbath, <emph>but</emph> why we are
<emph>called upon</emph> to do so in these latter days? And the
true answer will be found in the fact that the great
body of us have abused the law of liberty, as the
Israelites of old had done, and therefore, like them,
have need, in the providential dealings of God, to be
put back under rules and restrictions again, until we
are become fitted to act as <emph>children</emph> of God: and
when we are so, we have no wish to shake off such
restrictions, but of our own accord go beyond them.
</p>

<p>
In connection with this subject it is very remarkable
that the Church of England in her catechism
has not thought proper to connect the Lord's day in
particular with the fourth commandment; although
most of our writers for the last three hundred years
have found it necessary so to do. It is true that we
have done no more than our duty by pointing out to
our people that God from the beginning has hallowed
one day in seven, in order to prevent them
from relapsing into absolute heathenism;&mdash;the error
has been that we have too much omitted to show
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
that this was the least he would be satisfied with.
We have too much written as though those who
fully observed one day in seven had done their duty,
instead of leading them to feel that they cannot be
possessed of the spirit of true Christian obedience so
long as they confine themselves to the <emph>letter</emph> of the
law, and do not of their own accord embrace <emph>every</emph>
means of grace and spiritual improvement.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVII. On The Typical Interpretation Of Scripture.</head>

<p>
The writers of the primitive Church, taking the lead
from the inspired writers, and probably preserving
in many cases the traditional interpretations of the
Apostles, were in the habit of seeing types in many
things which to us appear to have none but a literal
meaning. It is, however, certain that there was
a great tendency amongst the Hellenistic Jews to
make the whole of the Old Testament typical; and
no doubt some Christians early followed them, as
the Epistle of Barnabas and the Shepherd of Hermas
(which were early writings, whether spurious or not)
abundantly show: and this tendency continued to
increase until the time of Origen, by whom it was
pushed to such extremes, that, from that time, it
became less popular.
</p>

<p>
Irenæus, however, is far from being a fanciful
writer, and was more directly connected with the
Apostles than most of the Fathers, and therefore the
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
types which he recognises are worthy of much more
attention than those of Origen.
</p>

<p>
With him, then, Abel was a type of Christ, as
having suffered innocently<note place='foot'>IV. xxxiv. 4. <q>Vide enim,</q> inquit, <q>quomodo justus perit, et
nemo intuetur; et viri justi tolluntur, et nemo excipit corde.</q>
Hæc autem in Abel quidem præmeditabantur, a prophetis vero
præconabantur, in Domino autem perficiebantur.</note>; Joseph<note place='foot'>Frag. xvii. Ἐν μὲν τῷ Ἰωσὴφ προετυπώθη.</note> was a type of
Christ, though in what way we are not told, probably
in the same sense as Abel; Moses was a type of
him when he spread forth his hands, and by that
sign conquered Amalek<note place='foot'>IV. xxiv. 1. Primogenitum mortuorum, et principem vitæ
Dei, eum qui per extensionem manuum dissolvebat Amalech,
et vivificabat hominem de serpentis plaga per fidem, quæ erat in
eum.&mdash;&mdash;Justin Martyr (<hi rend='italic'>Tryph.</hi> 90.) expresses the same idea
more fully; and remarks as confirmatory of the typical signification
of the posture of Moses, that it was altogether unusual as
a posture of prayer, and indeed adopted by him on no other
occasion, nor by any one since his time.</note>. That the brazen serpent
was a type of healing man from the bite of the
old serpent by faith, the words of Christ himself led
him to see<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>.
</p>

<p>
There were other points in which Moses was a
type of Christ. <q>He took an Ethiopian woman to
wife, whom he thereby made an Israelitess; foreshowing
that the wild olive is grafted into the olive,
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
and partakes of its fatness. For since that Christ,
who was born according to the flesh, was to be
sought out for destruction, and to be delivered in
Egypt, that is, amongst the Gentiles, to sanctify the
infants there, whence also he made a Church there;
(for Egypt was from the beginning a gentile nation,
as was also Æthiopia;) for this reason by the marriage
of Moses was shown the marriage of the Word,
and by the Æthiopian wife the Gentile Church is
pointed out: and those who speak against it, and
inveigh against and deride it, shall not be clean; for
they shall be leprous and cast out of the camp<note place='foot'>IV. xx. 12. Sic autem et Moyses Æthiopissam accipiebat
uxorem, quam ipse Israelitidem fecit; præsignificans, quoniam
oleaster inseritur in olivam, et participans pinguedinis ejus erit.
Quoniam enim is qui secundum carnem natus est Christus, a
populo quidem habebat inquiri ut occideretur, liberari vero in
Ægypto, id est, in Gentibus, sanctificare eos qui ibi essent infantes,
unde et Ecclesiam ibi perfecit; (Ægyptus enim ab initio
gentilis, quemadmodum et Æthiopia) propter hoc διὰ τοῦ γάμου
Μωüσέως ὁ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ νοητὸς γάμος ἐδείκνυτο, καὶ διὰ τῆς Αἰθιοπικῆς
νύμφης, ἡ ἐξ ἐθνῶν ἐκκλησία ἐδηλοῦτο· ἣν οἱ καταλαλοῦντες,
καὶ ἐνδιαβάλλοντες, καὶ διαμωκώμενοι, οὐκ ἔσονται καθαροί. λεπρήσουσι
γὰρ, καὰ ἐξαφορισθήσονται τῆς τῶν δικαίων παρεμβολῆς.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
He declares that the re-appearance of justification
by faith, after it had been for some time cast out of
sight by the Law of Moses, was typified by the
circumstances of the birth of the sons of Thamar.
For as Zarah put forth his hand first, and had the
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
scarlet thread bound upon it, and then retiring gave
way to his brother Pharez, and thus was born after
him; by this the Scripture declared <q>that people
which has the scarlet sign, viz. faith in uncircumcision,
which was shown first in the patriarchs, and
afterwards withdrawn when its brother was born;
and that in consequence that which was first was
born second, being known by the scarlet mark upon
it, which is the suffering of the Just One, foreshown
in Abel, written by the Prophets, and accomplished
in the last times in the Son of God<note place='foot'>IV. xxv. 2. Hoc et per alia quidem multa, jam vero et per
Thamar Judæ nurum typice ostenditur. Cum enim concepisset
geminos, alter eorum prior protulit manum suam: et cum obstetrix
putaret eum primogenitum esse, coccinum alligavit signum
in manu ejus. Cum hoc autem factum esset, et abstraxisset
manum suam, prior exivit frater ejus Phares; sic deinde secundus
ille, in quo erat coccinum, Zara: clare manifestante Scriptura
eum quidem populum qui habet coccinum signum, id est, eam
fidem quæ est in præputio, præostensam quidem primum in
Patriarchis, post deinde subtractam, uti nasceretur frater ejus;
deinde sic eum, qui prior esset, secundo loco natum, qui est cognitus
per signum coccinum, quod erat in eo; quod est passio
Justi, ab initio præfigurata in Abel, et descripta a Prophetis, perfecta
vero in novissimis temporibus in Filio Dei.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Irenæus was of opinion that some of the apparent
misdeeds of the old Patriarchs were not really sins,
but circumstances brought upon them by divine Providence,
with some mystical and typical end. Thus
the cohabitation of Lot and his daughters is with
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
him providential and typical, signifying that from one
Father the Word, by means of the life-giving Spirit,
the two sister synagogues, the Jewish and the Christian,
have brought forth a spiritual seed<note place='foot'>IV. xxxi. 1. Quemadmodum et Lot, qui eduxit de Sodomis
filias suas, quæ conceperunt de patre suo, et qui reliquit
in circumfinio uxorem suam statuam salis usque in hodiernum
diem. Etenim Lot non ex sua voluntate, neque ex sua concupiscentia
carnali, neque sensum neque cogitationem hujusmodi
accipiens, consummavit typum. Quemadmodum Scriptura dicit:
<q>Et intravit major natu, et dormivit cum patre suo illa; et non
scivit Lot cum dormiret illa, et cum surgeret:</q> et in minore hoc
idem: <q>Et non scivit,</q> inquit, <q>cum dormisset secum, nec cum
surrexisset:</q> μὴ εἰδότος τοῦ Λὼτ, μηδὲ ἡδονῇ δουλεύσαντος,
οἰκονομία ἐπετελεῖτο, δι᾽ ἧς αἱ δύο filiæ, id est, duæ συναγωγαὶ ἀπὸ
ἑνὸς καὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ πατρὸς τεκνοποιησάμεναι ἐμηνύοντο ἄνευ σαρκὸς
ἠδονῆς. Οὐ γὰρ ἦν ἄλλος οὐδεὶς σπέρμα ζωτικὸν καὶ τέκνων ἐπικαρπίαν
δυνάμενος δοῦναι αὐταῖς, καθὼς γέγραπται· <q>Dixit autem
major ad minorem; Pater noster senior est, et nemo est super
terram qui intret ad nos, ut oportet omni terræ: veni, potionemus
patrem nostrum vino, et dormiamus cum eo, ut suscitemus
de patre nostro semen.</q>&mdash;2. Illæ quidem filiæ secundum simplicitatem
et innocentiam putantes universos homines perisse, quemadmodum
Sodomitas, et in universam terram iracundiam Dei
supervenisse, dicebant hæc. Quapropter et ipsæ excusabiles
sunt, arbitrantes se solas relictas cum patre suo ad conservationem
generis humani, et propter hoc circumveniebant patrem.
Per verba autem earum significabatur, neminem esse alterum qui
possit filiorum generationem majori et minori synagogæ præstare,
quam Patrem nostrum. Pater autem generis humani Verbum
Dei; quemadmodum Moyses ostendit dicens: <q>Nonne hic ipse
Pater tuus possedit te, et fecit te, et creavit te?</q> Quando
igitur hic vitale semen, id est, Spiritum remissionis peccatorum
per quem vivificamur, effudit in humanum genus? Nonne tunc
cum convescebatur cum hominibus, et bibebat vinum in terra?
<q>Venit</q> enim, inquit, <q>filius hominis manducans et bibens:</q>
et cum recubuisset, obdormivit, et somnum cepit. Quemadmodum
ipse in David dicit: <q>Ego dormivi et somnum cepi.</q> Et
quoniam in nostra communicatione et vita hoc agebat, iterum ait:
<q>Et somnus meus suavis mihi factus est.</q> Totum autem significabatur
per Lot, quoniam semen patris omnium, id est, Spiritus
Dei, per quem facta sunt omnia, commixtus et unitus est
carni, hoc est, plasmati suo: per quam commixtionem et unitatem
duæ synagogæ, id est, duæ congregationes fructificantes ex patre
suo filios vivos vivo Deo.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>

<p>
St. Paul has taught us that Jacob and Esau were
types of the elder and younger Churches; but Irenæus
has much amplified the figure, and brought in
other parallelisms. <q>And if any one would study
the acts of Jacob, he will find them not empty, but
full of providential arrangements<note place='foot'>Justin Martyr expresses the same sentiment: <hi rend='italic'>Tryph.</hi> 134.
Οἰκονομίαι τινὲς μεγάλων μυστηρίων ἐν ἑκάστῃ τινὶ τοιαύτῃ πράξει
ἀπετελοῦντο.</note>: and first in his
birth, as he caught hold of the heel of his brother,
and was called Jacob, that is, the supplanter; holding
and not holden; fettering but not fettered;
struggling and conquering; holding in his hand the
heel of his adversary, i. e. the victory: to this end
was the Lord born, whose birth he typified, concerning
whom John saith in the Revelation, <hi rend='italic'>He went
forth conquering, to conquer</hi>. Moreover, in taking the
birthright when his brother disdained it; as also the
younger people accepted Christ the first-born, when
the elder people rejected him, saying, <emph>We have no
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
king but Cæsar</emph>. And in Christ was the whole blessing;
and for this reason the latter people stole from
the Father the blessing of the former people, as
Jacob took away the blessing from Esau. For which
cause his brother suffered from the lying in wait and
persecutions of a brother, as also the Church suffers
from the Jews<note place='foot'>Justin M. <hi rend='italic'>Tryph.</hi> 134, ad finem, draws the same parallel.
Τὸν χρόνον πάντα ἐμισεῖτο ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ ὁ Ἰακώβ· καὶ ἡμεῖς
νῦν, καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ Κύριος ἡμῶν μισεῖται ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν ἄλλων
ἁπλῶς ἀνθρώπων, ὄντων πάντων τῇ φύσει ἀδελφῶν.</note>. The twelve tribes, the children of
Israel, were born in a foreign country, as Christ
began at a distance from his home to lay the twelve-pillared
foundation of the Church. The spotted
sheep were the wages of Jacob; and Christ's reward
is the assemblage of men from differing nations into
the one bond of the faith<note place='foot'>Justin, ibid. Ἐδούλευσεν Ἰακὼβ τῷ Λάβαν ὑπὲρ τῶν ῥαντῶν
καὶ πολυμόρφων θρεμμάτων· ἐδούλευσε καὶ τὴν μέχρι σταυροῦ
δουλείαν ὁ Χριστὸς ὑπὲρ τῶν ἐκ παντὸς γένους ποικίλων καὶ πολυειδῶν
ἀνθρώπων, δι᾽ αἵματος καὶ μυστηρίου τοῦ σταυροῦ κτησάμενος
αὐτούς.</note>, as the Father promised
him: <q>Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen
for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the
earth for thy possession.</q> And as to Jacob, the Lord's
prophet, it consisted of a multitude of children, it
was necessary that he should have children from two
sisters; as also Christ from two laws of one and the
same Father<note place='foot'>Justin, ibid. Ἀλλὰ Λεία μὲν ὁ λαὸς ὑμῶν καὶ ἡ συναγωγή·
Ῥαχὴλ δὲ ἐκκλησία ἡμῶν.</note>; and likewise of two maid-servants,
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
signifying that Christ should make sons of God out
both of those who in the flesh were free and of
slaves, granting to all alike the gift of the life-giving
Spirit<note place='foot'>Justin, ibid. Εἰς ἀποκατάστασιν ἀμφοτέρων τε τῶν ἐλευθέρων
τέκνων καὶ τῶν ἐν αὐτοῖς δούλων Χριστὸς ἐλήλυθε, τῶν αὐτῶν πάντας
καταξιῶν τοὺς φυλάσσοντας τὰς ἐντολὰς αὐτοῦ· ὃν τρόπον καὶ
οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐλευθέρων καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν δούλων γενόμενοι τῷ Ἰακὼβ
πάντες υἱοὶ καὶ ὁμότιμοι γεγόνασι.</note>. And he did all for the sake of the younger,
Rachel, who typified the Church, for whose sake
Christ endured<note place='foot'>IV. xxi. 3. Si quis autem et actus qui sunt Jacob addiscat,
inveniet eos non inanes, sed plenos dispositionum. Et imprimis
in nativitate ejus, quemadmodum apprehendit calcaneum fratris,
et Jacob vocatus est, id est, supplantator; tenens, et qui non
tenetur; ligans pedes, sed qui non ligatur; luctans, et vincens;
tenens in manu calcaneum adversarii, id est, victoriam. Ad hoc
enim nascebatur Dominus, cujus typum generationis præstabat,
de quo et Joannes in Apocalypsi ait: <q>Exivit vincens, ut vinceret.</q>
Deinde autem primogenita accipiens, quando vituperavit
ea frater ejus: quemadmodum et junior populus eum primogenitum
Christum accepit, cum eum repulit populus ætate provectior,
dicens: <q>Non habemus Regem, nisi Cæsarem.</q> In Christo
autem universa benedictio: et propter hoc benedictiones prioris
populi a Patre subripuit posterior populus, quemadmodum Jacob
abstulit benedictionem hujus Esaü; ob quam causam fratris
patiebatur insidias et persecutiones frater suus, sicut et Ecclesia
hoc idem a Judæis patitur. Peregre nascebantur <hi rend='smallcaps'>xii</hi> tribus, genus
Israel, quoniam et Christus peregre incipiebat duodecastylum
firmamentum Ecclesiæ generare. Variæ oves, quæ fiebant, huic
Jacob merces: et Christi merces, qui ex variis et differentibus
gentibus in unam cohortem fidei convenientes fiunt homines,
quemadmodum Pater promisit ei: <q>Postula,</q> dicens, <q>a me, et
dabo tibi Gentes hæreditatem tuam, et possessionem tuam terminos
terræ.</q> Et quoniam multitudinis filiorum Domini Prophetæ
fiebat Jacob, necessitas omnis fuit ex duabus sororibus
eum filios facere; quemadmodum Christus ex duabus Legibus
unius et ejusdem Patris: similiter autem et ex ancillis; significans
quoniam secundum carnem ex liberis et ex servis Christus
statueret filios Dei, similiter omnibus dans munus Spiritus vivificantis
nos. Omnia autem ille faciebat propter illam juniorem,
bonos oculos habentem, Rachel, quæ præfigurabat Ecclesiam,
propter quam sustinuit Christus: qui tunc quidem per Patriarchas
suos et Prophetas præfigurans et prænuntians futura,
præexercens suam partem dispositionibus Dei, et assuescens hæreditatem
suam obedire Deo, et peregrinari in sæculo, et sequi
verbum ejus, et præsignificare futura. Nihil enim vacuum, neque
sine signo apud Deum.</note>.</q>
</p>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<p>
Rahab the harlot, again, who was a heathen and
a great sinner, and received the three spies, and
by reliance upon the scarlet thread, (which meant
the same thing as the passover,) was saved, whilst
the city in which she lived was destroyed, is a type
of sinners in all future ages, who, revering the Trinity,
and by faith in Christ our passover, are saved,
whilst the world of those who rejected him are
lost<note place='foot'><p>IV. xx. 12. Sic autem et Raab fornicaria semetipsam quidem
condemnans, quoniam esset gentilis, omnium peccatorum
rea, suscepit autem tres speculatores, qui speculabantur universam
terram, et apud se abscondit, Patrem scilicet et Filium cum
Spiritu sancto. Et cum universa civitas, in qua habitabat, concidisset
in ruinam, canentibus septem tubicinis, in ultimis Raab
fornicaria conservata est cum universa domo sua, fide signi coccini:
sicut et Dominus dicebat his, qui adventum ejus non excipiebant,
Pharisæis scilicet, et coccini signum nullificant, quod
erat pascha, redemptio et exodus populi ex Ægypto, dicens:
<q>Publicani et meretrices præcedunt vos in Regno cœlorum.</q>
</p>
<p>
The same type is acknowledged by Clement of Rome, in his
<hi rend='italic'>First Epistle to the Corinthians</hi>, § 12. Καὶ προσέθεντο αὐτῇ
δοῦναι σημεῖον, ὅπως κρεμάσῃ ἐκ τοῦ οἴκου αὐτῆς κόκκινον, πρόδηλον
ποιοῦντες ὅτι διὰ τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ Κυρίου λύτρωσις ἔσται πᾶσι τοῖς
πιστεύουσιν καὶ ἐλπίζουσιν ἐπὶ τὸν Θεόν.&mdash;&mdash;Likewise by Justin,
<hi rend='italic'>Tryph.</hi> 111. Καὶ γὰρ τὸ σύμβολον τοῦ κοκκίνου σπαρτίου, οὗ ἔδωκαν
... οἱ κατάσκοποι Ῥαὰβ τῇ πόρνῃ, ... ὁμοίως τὸ σύμβολον
τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ Χριστοῦ ἐδήλου, δι᾽ οὗ οἱ πάλαι πόρνοι καὶ ἄδικοι ἐκ
πάντων τῶν ἐθνῶν σώζονται, ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν λαβόντες.</p></note>.
</p>

<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>

<p>
Joshua, again, he makes a type of Christ, bringing
his people into their eternal inheritance, as Moses
brought them out of captivity; and he further declares
that as Moses, representing the law, rested, in
prefiguration of the cessation of the law, so Joshua,
as representing the Gospel, and a perfect type of the
personal Word, discoursed to the people; and that
as Moses gave the manna, so Joshua gave the new
bread, the first-fruits of life, a figure of the body of
Christ<note place='foot'><p>Frag. xix. Λάβε πρὸς σεαυτὸν τὸν Ἰησοῦν υἱὸν Ναυῆ. Ἔδει
γὰρ ἐξ Αἰγύπτου Μωüσῆν τὸν λαὸν ἐξαγαγεῖν, τὸν δὲ Ἰησοῶν εἰς
τὴν κληροδοσίαν εἰσαγαγεῖν· καὶ τὸν μὲν Μωüσῆν, ὡς νόμον, ἀνάπαυλαν
λαμβάνειν, Ἰησοῦν δὲ, ὡς Λόγον, καὶ τοῦ ἐνυποστάτου
Λόγου τύπον ἀψευδῆ, τῷ λαῷ δημηγορεῖν· καὶ τὸν μὲν Μωüσῆν τὸ
μάννα τοῖς πατράσι τροφὴν διδόναι, τὸν δὲ Ἰησοῦν τὸν νέον ἄρτι
[rather ἄρτον], τὴν ἀπαρχὴν τῆς ζωῆς, τύπον τοῦ σώματος τοῦ
Χριστοῦ· καθά φησι καὶ ἡ γραφὴ, ὅτι τότε ἐπαύσατο τὸ μάννα Κυρίου
μετὰ τὸ φαγεῖν τὸν σῖτον λαὸν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς.
</p>
<p>
Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> 9. § 85. &amp; <hi rend='italic'>Pædag.</hi> I. 7.
§ 60, makes Joshua a type of Christ, but draws other parallels
than those of Irenæus.</p></note>.
</p>

<p>
He finds a very humble parallel to our Lord in
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
the ass of Balaam: for as all men rest from toil by
mounting on a beast of burden, so Christ gives us
repose from the toil of our souls by bearing the
burden of our sins<note place='foot'>Frag. xxiii. Καὶ οὗτος ἐπεβεβήκει ἐπὶ τῆς ὄνου αὐτοῦ. Ἡ μὲν
ὄνος τύπον εἶχε σώματος Χριστοῦ· ἐφ᾽ ὃν πάντες οἱ ἄνθρωποι ἐκ
καυμάτων ἀναπαυόμενοι, ὡς ὑπὸ ὀχήματος βαστάζονται. τὸ γὰρ
φορτίον τῶν ἡμετέρων ἁμαρτημάτων ὁ Σωτὴρ ἀνεδέξατο.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The last specimens of types which I shall bring
forward are to be found in the history of Samson.
The temple in which he found his death, filled with
Philistines, St. Irenæus supposes to represent the
world of the ungodly; Samson himself is God's true
people; the two pillars are the two covenants; and
the lad who conducted Samson to the pillars is John
the Baptist, leading God's people to know the mystery
of Christ<note place='foot'>Frag. xxvii. Τὸ μὲν οὖν παιδάριον χειραγωγοῦν τὸν Σαμψὼν
προτυπωθήσεται εἶς Ἰωάννην τὸν Βαπτιστὴν, ἐπιδεικνύντα τῷ λαῷ
τὴν εἰς Χριστὸν πίστιν. ὁ δὲ οἶκος, εἰς ὃν ἦσαν συνηγμένοι,
σημαίνεται εἶναι ὁ κόσμος, ἐν ᾧ κατῴκει τὰ ἀλλόφυλα ἔθνη καὶ
ἄπιστα, θυσιάζοντα τοῖς εἰδώλοις αὑτῶν· οἱ δὲ δύο στύλοι, αἱ δύο
διαθῆκαι. τὸ οὖν ἐπαναπαυθῆναι τὸν Σαμψὼν ἐπὶ τοὺς στύλους,
τὸν διδαχθένται λαὸν ἐπιγνῶναι τὸ τοῦ Χριστοῦ μυστήριον.</note>.
</p>

<p>
These types will, of course, bring with them to the
mind various degrees of probability. The Scripture
itself teaches us the principle of typical application;
and no person who considers the manner in which
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
the various books of the New Testament were written,
their occasional nature, so to speak, will suppose
that the whole of the types are developed in it. We
must therefore be left to ourselves, in some degree,
to discover the other types; and yet it cannot be
supposed that all the resemblances our mind can
strike out were absolutely intended. But it must be
<emph>some</emph> recommendation of any typical application, to
say the least, to find it struck out in that early age,
when those who had conversed with apostolical men
were living: and where we find a number of writers
agreeing to adopt any one type, (as, for instance,
Clement of Rome, Justin and Irenæus, make Rahab's
scarlet line typical,) it will, I suppose, appear to
most minds to have a very high probability. And it
is only by noticing the types in each early writer,
that we can arrive at this species of authority for
any one particular type.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVIII. On The Intermediate State.</head>

<p>
Persons sometimes ask, What is the advantage of
studying the Fathers? why cannot we be contented
with the light of Scripture? Those who study them
reply, that one use at least is, that by their help the
obscure parts of Scripture, where some truths are
but hinted at or supposed, are brought forth into
light and clear outline.
</p>

<p>
An instance of this, and a very unobjectionable
one, is to be found in the doctrine of Irenæus, and
not of him alone, as to the intermediate state. We
know from Scripture that there is an unseen state
to which Christ descended<note place='foot'>Acts ii. 31.</note>; and that the just after
death go to paradise<note place='foot'>Luke xvi. 22. xxiii. 43.</note>, and are with Christ<note place='foot'>Phil. i. 23.</note>. If the
parable of the rich man and Lazarus is taken literally,
it seems to be implied that the good and bad are
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
separated in that state, and yet that they are capable
of holding intercourse with each other; and there
seems to be a hint that the state of the dead is,
in some sense, a state of confinement<note place='foot'>1 Pet. iii. 19. iv. 6.</note>. Beyond
this we have little, if any thing.
</p>

<p>
Our views, however, such as they are, become
confirmed and acquire definiteness, as we find the
same subjects treated of or alluded to by Irenæus.
</p>

<p>
He treats the parable I have spoken of, as not
strictly a parable, but a relation of real occurrences<note place='foot'>IV. ii. 4. Non autem fabulam retulit nobis pauperis et
divitis.</note>;
and asserts that it shows us that the soul, in a state
of separation from the body, retains its individuality,
so that disembodied souls may know each other, and
hold mutual intercourse; and that each class of
persons has its appropriate habitation even before
the day of judgment<note place='foot'>II. xxxiv. 1. Plenissime autem Dominus docuit, non solum
perseverare, non de corpore in corpus transgredientes, animas;
sed et characterem corporis, in quo etiam adaptantur, custodire
eundem, et meminisse eas operum, quæ egerunt hic, et a quibus
cessaverunt, in ea relatione, quæ scribitur de divite et de Lazaro
eo, qui refrigerabat in sinu Abrahæ: in qua ait, divitem cognoscere
Lazarum post mortem, et Abraham autem similiter, et
manere in suo ordine unumquemque ipsorum, et postulare mitti
ei ad opem ferendam Lazarum, cui ne quidem de mensæ suæ
amicis communicabat: et de Abrahæ responso, qui non tantum ea,
quæ secundum se, sed et quæ secundum divitem essent, sciebat;
et præcipiebat Moysi assentire et Prophetis eos, qui non mallent
pervenire in illum locum pœnæ, et recipientes præconium ejus,
qui resurrexerit a mortuis. Per hæc enim manifeste declaratum
est, et perseverare animas, et non de corpore in corpus transire,
et habere hominis figuram, ut etiam cognoscantur, et meminerint
eorum, quæ sint hic; et propheticum quoque adesse Abrahæ, et
dignam habitationem unamquamque gentem percipere, etiam ante
judicium.</note>. Accordingly he affirms that
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
Christ observed the law of the dead, and departed
into the midst of the shadow of death, where the
souls of the dead were. And conformably he teaches
us that the souls of his disciples will at death depart
into the invisible place destined for them by God,
and there remain, waiting for the resurrection<note place='foot'>V. xxxi. 2. Si ergo Dominus legem mortuorum servavit, ut
fieret primogenitus a mortuis, et commoratus usque in tertiam
diem in inferioribus terræ; post deinde surgens in carne, ut
etiam fixuras clavorum ostenderet discipulis, sic ascendit ad
Patrem; quomodo non confundantur, qui dicunt inferos quidem
esse hunc mundum, qui sit secundum nos; interiorem autem
hominem ipsorum derelinquentem hic corpus, in supercœlestem
ascendere locum? Cum enim Dominus <q>in medio umbræ mortis
abierit,</q> ubi animæ mortuorum erant, post deinde corporaliter
resurrexit, et post resurrectionem assumptus est; manifestum
est quia et discipulorum ejus, propter quos et hæc operatus est
Dominus, Αἱ ψυχαὶ ἀπέρχονται εἰς τὸν τόπον invisibilem τὸν ὡρισμένον
αὐταῖς ἀπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ, κἀκεῖ μέχρι τῆς ἀναστάσεως φοιτῶσι,
περιμένουσαι τὴν ἀνάστασιν· ἔπειτα ἀπολαβοῦσαι τὰ σώματα, καὶ
ὀλοκλήρως ἀναστᾶσαι, τουτέστι σωματικῶς, καθὼς καὶ ὁ Κύριος
ἀνέστη, οὕτως ἐλεύσονται εἰς τὴς ὄψιν τοῦ Θεοῦ. <q>Nemo enim
est discipulus super magistrum: perfectus autem omnis erit
sicut magister ejus.</q> Quomodo ergo Magister noster non statim
evolans abiit, sed sustinens definitum a Patre resurrectionis suæ
tempus, (quod et per Jonam manifestatum est,) post triduum
resurgens assumptus est; sic et nos sustinere debemus definitum
a Deo resurrectionis nostræ tempus, prænuntiatum a Prophetis,
et sic resurgentes assumi, quotquot Dominus ad hoc dignos habuerit.&mdash;&mdash;So
Clement of Rome (<hi rend='italic'>Ad Corr.</hi> I. 50) affirms that
<q>they who have departed, fully established in love, enjoy the
place of the just</q>&mdash;χώραν εὐσεβῶν.</note>.
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
And this invisible place he declares to be paradise, to
which Enoch and Elias are already translated with
their bodies, anticipating immortality<note place='foot'>V. v. 1. Ὅπουγε Ἐνὼχ εὐαρεστήσας τῷ Θεῷ, ἐν σώματι μετετέθη,
τὴν μετάθεσιν τῶν δικαίων προμηνύων· καὶ Ἡλίας, ὡς ἦν,
ἐν τῇ τοῦ πλάσματος ὑποστάσει ἀνελήφθη, τὴν ἀνάληψιν τῶν πνευματικῶν
προφητεύων, κ.τ.λ. ... Διὸ καὶ λέγουσιν οἱ πρεσβύτεροι,
τῶν ἀποστόλων μαθηταὶ, τοὺς μετατεθέντας ἐκεῖσε [that is, to paradise]
μετατεθῆναι· (δικαίοις γὰρ ἀνθρώποις καὶ πνευματοφόροις
ἠτοιμάσθη ὁ παράδεισος, ἐν ᾧ καὶ Παῦλος ἀπόστολος εἰσκομισθεὶς
ἤκουσεν ἄρῥητα ῥήματα, ὡς πρὸς ἡμᾶς ἐν τῷ παρόντι·) κἀκεῖ
μένειν τοὺς μετατεθέντας ἕως συντελείας, προοιμιαζομένους τὴν
ἀφθαρσίαν.</note>. But to
those who have died he declares that this state is
a state of condemnation, even to those who are
found in life<note place='foot'>III. xix. 3. Ut quemadmodum caput resurrexit a mortuis,
sic et reliquum corpus omnis hominis, qui invenitur in vita,
impleto tempore condemnationis ejus, quæ erat propter inobedientiam,
resurgat.</note>. For he believed that the souls of
the just, although in death and consequent condemnation,
would retain the Spirit of God, and consequently
the seed and pledge of a new life<note place='foot'>V. ix. 2. Quotquot autem timent Deum, et credunt in adventum
Filii ejus, et per fidem constituunt in cordibus suis Spiritum
Dei, hi tales juste homines dicentur, et mundi et spiritales
et viventes Deo; quia habent Spiritum Patris, qui emundat
hominem et sublevat in vitam Dei.... Infirmitas enim
carnis absorpta potentem ostendit spiritum; spiritus autem rursus
absorbens infirmitatem, hæreditate possidet carnem in se:
et ex utrisque factus est vivens homo; vivens quidem propter
participationem Spiritus, homo autem propter substantiam carnis.&mdash;&mdash;3.
Ubi autem Spiritus Patris ibi homo vivens, sanguis
rationalis ad ultionem a Deo custoditus, caro a Spiritu possessa,
oblita quidem sui, qualitatem autem spiritus assumens, conformis
facta Verbo Dei.</note>; and
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
that by means of this same Spirit they would rise
again at the last day, being quickened by the Spirit,
even as their Lord was<note place='foot'>V. vii. 1. Et iterum ad Romanos ait: <q>Si autem Spiritus
ejus qui suscitavit Jesum a mortuis habitat in vobis, qui suscitavit
Christum a mortuis vivificabit et mortalia corpora vestra.</q>&mdash;&mdash;2.
Hæc sunt enim corpora mortalia, id est, participantia animæ,
quam cum amiserint, mortificantur; deinde per Spiritum surgentia
fiunt corpora spiritualia, uti per Spiritum semper permanentem
habeant vitam.</note>.
</p>

<p>
There is another branch of this subject; viz. the
employment of our Saviour while in the intermediate
state. Irenæus thought, as did other Fathers, that
our Lord went and preached the Gospel to those
who were dead, there being forgiveness to whosoever
would believe in him, so preaching to them; and
that those who in old times had hoped in him, and
foretold his coming, did then believe in him and
obtain remission<note place='foot'><p>IV. xxvii. 2. Et propter hoc Dominum in ea, quæ sunt
sub terra, descendisse, evangelizantem et illis adventum suum;
remissione peccatorum exsistente his qui credunt in eum. Crediderunt
autem in eum omnes qui sperabant in eum, id est, qui
adventum ejus prænuntiaverunt, et dispositionibus ejus servierunt,
justi et prophetæ et patriarchæ; quibus similiter ut nobis
remisit peccata.
</p>
<p>
Clem. Alex. <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> VI. 6. § 44. Διόπερ ὁ Κύριος εὐηγγελίσατο
καὶ τοῖς ἐν Ἅιδου.&mdash;&mdash;45. Φησὶ γοῦν ἡ γραφή· Λέγει ὁ Ἅιδης τῇ
ἀπολείᾳ· Εἶδος μὲν αὐτοῦ οὐκ εἴδομεν, φωνὴν δὲ αὐτοῦ ἠκούσαμεν....
Τί δ᾽ οὐχὶ δηλοῦσιν εὐηγγελίσθαι τὸν Κύριον τοῖς τε ἀπολωλόσιν
ἐν τῷ κατακλυσμῷ, μᾶλλον δὲ πεπεδημένοις καὶ τοῖς ἐν
φυλακῇ τε καὶ φρουρᾷ συνεχομένοις.&mdash;&mdash;Tertullian <hi rend='italic'>de Anima</hi>, 55.
Christus Deus, quia et homo, mortuus secundum Scripturas, et
sepultus secus easdem, huic quoque legi satisfecit, forma humanæ
mortis apud inferos functus; nec ante ascendit in sublimiora
cœlorum, quam descendit in inferiora terrarum, ut illic patriarchas
et prophetas compotes sui faceret.&mdash;See also Cyril of Jerusalem,
<hi rend='italic'>Catech.</hi> xiv. 18, 19.</p></note>.
</p>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<p>
Here again we have a definite meaning given to
passages of Holy Writ, respecting which we may
discuss and have discussed endlessly, resting in the
mere light of Scripture. And that being the case,
it appears more rational to accept the interpretation
furnished by early writers, who are in all probability
in this and other cases giving us views which had
come down from the Apostles themselves.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIX. On Unfulfilled Prophecy.</head>

<p>
It was the opinion of the Gnostics that the Tempter
was either the same as the God of the Old Testament,
acting in opposition to the Supreme Being,
or a creature and agent of this God. In contradiction
to this notion, Irenæus lays down, and confirms
from various portions of Scripture, that he was
one of the angels, attendants upon the Supreme
Being, who rebelled against him, who consummated
his rebellion by seducing man from his allegiance,
and who is always setting himself up as a rebel
against his Maker<note place='foot'>V. xxiv. 4. See p. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, note 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Having proved this from the past history of the
world, he continues the proof by adducing the prophecies
concerning Antichrist, the Millennium, and
the consummation of all things<note place='foot'>Book V. chapter xxv. to the end.</note>. In this way he is
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
led to develope his own views upon those subjects:
and as his opinions on the Millennium are different
from those which have prevailed subsequently, with
almost universal consent in the Western Church,
that portion of his Treatise is rarely found complete
in our present MSS., the copyists not thinking it
proper or worth their while to copy what was generally
disapproved by the Church<note place='foot'>The five last chapters of the Fifth Book are wanting in all
but two MSS.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Irenæus, then, regards Antichrist as a direct agent
of Satan, in and by means of whom he will fulfil the
great object of his rebellion, of procuring himself
to be owned by mankind as their king, and worshipped
as their God; by whom he will abolish all
idols, and set himself up as the one idol, uniting in
himself all the delusion of all the false gods who
have ever existed. In him, therefore, will be literally
fulfilled the prophecy of St. Paul, 2 Thess. ii. 3, 4<note place='foot'>V. xxv. 1. Et non tantum autem per ea quæ dicta sunt, sed
et per ea quæ erunt sub Antichristo, ostenditur, quoniam existens
apostata et latro, quasi Deus vult adorari; et cum sit servus,
Regem se vult præconari. Ille enim omnem suscipiens diaboli
virtutem, veniet non quasi Rex justus, nec quasi in subjectione
Dei legitimus; sed impius et injustus et sine lege, quasi apostata
et iniquus et homicida, quasi latro, diabolicam apostasiam in se
recapitulans: et idola quidem seponens, ad suadendum quod ipse
sit Deus; se autem extollens unum idolum, habens in semetipso
reliquorum idolorum varium errorem: ut hi qui per multas
abominationes adorant diabolum, hi per hoc unum idolum serviant
ipsi, de quo Apostolus in epistola, quæ est ad Thessalonicenses
secunda, sic ait: <q>Quoniam nisi venerit abscessio primum,
et revelatus fuerit homo peccati, filius perditionis, qui adversatur
et extollit se super omne quod dicitur Deus, aut colitur; ita ut
in templo Dei sedeat, ostendens semetipsum tanquam sit Deus.</q>
Manifeste igitur Apostolus ostendit apostasiam ejus, et quoniam
extollitur super omne quod dicitur Deus, vel quod colitur, hoc
est, super omne idolum, (hi enim sunt qui dicuntur quidem ab
hominibus, non sunt autem, Dii,) et quoniam ipse se tyrannico
more conabitur ostendere Deum.</note>;
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
for he will literally enthrone himself in the temple of
God at Jerusalem, and by oppressive methods will
endeavour to exhibit himself as God, and Christ<note place='foot'>V. xxv. 2. Super hæc autem manifestavit et illud, quod a
nobis per multa ostensum est, quoniam in Hierosolymis templum
dispositione veri Dei factum est. Ipse enim Apostolus ex sua
persona diffinitive templum illud dixit Dei. Ostendimus autem
in tertio libro, nullum ab Apostolis ex sua persona Deum appellari,
nisi eum qui vere sit Deus, Patrem Domini nostri: cujus
jussu hoc, quod est in Hierosolymis, factum est templum, ob eas
causas quæ a nobis dictæ sunt: in quo adversarius sedebit, tentans
semetipsum Christum ostendere, sicut et Dominus ait:
<q>Cum autem videritis abominationem desolationis, quod dictum
est per Danielem Prophetam, stantem in loco sancto, (qui legit,
intelligat,) tunc qui in Judæa sunt, fugiant in montes: et qui in
tecto est, non descendat tollere quidquam de domo. Erit enim
tunc pressura magna, qualis non est facta ab initio sæculi usque
nunc, sed neque fiet.</q>&mdash;4. Et Dominus autem hoc item non credentibus
sibi dicebat: <q>Ego veni in nomine Patris mei, et non
recepistis me; cum alius venerit in nomine suo, illum recipietis:</q>
alium dicens Antichristum, qui alienus est a Domino. Et ipse est
<q>iniquus judex,</q> qui a Domino dictus est, quoniam <q>Deum non
timebat, neque hominem reverebatur,</q> ad quem fugit vidua oblita
Dei, id est, terrena Hierusalem, ad ulciscendum de inimico.
Quod et faciet in tempore regni sui: transferet regnum in eam, et
in templo Dei sedet [sedebit], seducens eos qui adorant eum, quasi
ipse sit Christus. Quapropter ait Daniel iterum: <q>Et sanctum
desolabitur: et datum est in sacrificium peccatum, et projecta est
in terra justitia, et fecit, et prospere cessit.</q>&mdash;&mdash;xxviii. 2. Et
propter hoc Apostolus ait: <q>Pro eo quod dilectionem Dei non
receperunt, ut salvi fierent, et ideo mittet eos Deus in operationem
erroris, ut credant mendacio, ut judicentur omnes qui non crediderunt
veritati, sed consenserunt iniquitati.</q> Illo enim veniente,
et sua sententia apostasiam recapitulante in semetipsum, et sua
voluntate et arbitrio operante quæcumque operabitur, et in templo
Dei sedente, ut sicut Christum adorent illum qui seducentur
ab illo; quapropter et juste <q>in stagnum projicietur ignis:</q>
Deo autem secundum suam providentiam præsciente omnia, et
apto tempore eum, qui talis futurus erat, immittente, <q>ut credant
falso, et judicentur omnes, qui non crediderunt veritati, sed consenserunt
iniquitati.</q></note>.
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
Irenæus applies to this event the prophecy of Daniel
concerning <emph>the abomination of desolation</emph>, quoted by
our Lord, Matt. xxiv. 15, 16<note place='foot'>V. xxv. 4.</note>.
</p>

<p>
He likewise applies to him what is said by Daniel
of <emph>the little horn</emph>, in Dan. vii. 8. 20-26; conceiving
the <emph>ten horns</emph> to be ten kings of different portions of
the Roman Empire<note place='foot'>V. xxv. 3. Daniel autem novissimi regni finem respiciens,
(id est, novissimos decem Reges, in quos dividitur regnum illorum,
super quos filius perditionis veniet,) cornua dicit decem nasci
bestiæ; et alterum cornu pusillum nasci in medio ipsorum, et
tria cornua de prioribus eradicari a facie ejus. <q>Et ecce,</q> inquit,
<q>oculi quasi oculi hominis in cornu hoc, et os loquens magna, et
aspectus ejus major reliquis. Videbam, et cornu illud faciebat
bellum adversus sanctos, et valebat adversus eos; quoadusque
venit vetustas dierum, et judicium dedit sanctis altissimi Dei, et
tempus pervenit, et regnum obtinuerunt sancti.</q> Postea in exsolutione
visionum dictum est ei: <q>Bestia quarta regnum
quartum erit in terra, quod eminebit super reliqua regna, et
manducabit omnem terram, et conculcabit eam, et concidet. Et
decem cornua ejus, decem Reges exsurgent: et post eos surget
alius, qui superabit malis omnes qui ante eum fuerunt, et Reges
tres deminorabit, et verba adversus altissimum Deum loquetur, et
sanctos altissimi Dei conteret, et cogitabit demutare tempora et
Legem: et dabitur in manu ejus, usque ad tempus temporum et
dimidium tempus,</q> hoc est, per triennium et sex menses, in
quibus veniens regnabit super terram.&mdash;&mdash;xxvi. 1. Manifestius
adhuc etiam de novissimo tempore, et de his qui sunt in eo decem
Regibus, in quos dividetur quod nunc regnat imperium, significavit
Joannes Domini discipulus in Apocalypsi, edisserens quæ
fuerint decem cornua, quæ a Daniele visa sunt, dicens sic dictum
esse sibi: <q>Et decem cornua quæ vidisti decem Reges sunt, qui
regnum nondum acceperunt, sed potestatem quasi reges una
hora accipient cum bestia. Hi unam sententiam habent, et virtutem
et potestatem suam bestiæ dant. Hi cum Agno pugnabunt,
et Agnus vincet eos, quoniam Dominus Dominorum est, et
Rex Regum.</q> Manifestum est itaque, quoniam ex his tres interficiet
ille qui venturus est, et reliqui subjicientur ei, et ipse
octavus in eis; et vastabunt Babylonem, et comburent eam igni,
et dabunt regnum suum bestiæ, et effugabunt Ecclesiam: post
deinde ab adventu Domini nostri destruentur. Quoniam enim
oportet dividi regnum, et sic deperire, Dominus ait: <q>Omne
regnum divisum in se, desolabitur: et omnis civitas vel domus
divisa in se, non stabit.</q> Dividi igitur et regnum, et civitatem,
et domum oportet in decem: et propterea jam partitionem et
divisionem præfiguravit.</note>, and consequently believing
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
that Antichrist will be a power, who will overthrow
and kill three of the kings of those divisions, and
reign for a space of three years and a half; during
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
which time he will trample under foot the saints of
the Most High<note place='foot'>V. xxv. 3.</note>.
</p>

<p>
He affirms that he is the <emph>other</emph>, mentioned by our
Lord, (John v. 43,) <emph>who will come in his own name</emph>;
and the <emph>unjust judge, who feared not God nor regarded
men</emph>, to whom the widowed Jerusalem will come for
redress against her enemy; in consequence of which
he will transfer the seat of his dominion thither.
</p>

<p>
He declares him to be the <emph>wicked king</emph> of Daniel,
(viii. 23-25,) who for three years and a half will
put down the pure offering which the saints offer to
God, i. e. the Holy Eucharist<note place='foot'>V. xxv. 4. Et Gabriel Angelus exsolvens ejus visionem, de
hoc ipso dicebat: <q>Et in novissimo regni ipsorum exsurget Rex
improbus facie valde, et intelligens quæstiones; et valida virtus
ejus et admirabilis; et corrumpet, et diriget, et faciet, et exterminabit
fortes et populum sanctum, et jugum torquis ejus dirigetur:
dolus in manu ejus, et in corde suo exaltabitur, et dolo
disperdet multos, et ad perditionem multorum stabit, et quomodo
ova manu conteret.</q> Deinde et tempus tyrannidis ejus significat,
in quo tempore fugabuntur Sancti, qui purum sacrificium offerunt
Domino: <q>Et in dimidio hebdomadis,</q> ait, <q>tolletur sacrificium
et libatio, et in Templum abominatio desolationis, et usque ad
consummationem temporis consummatio dabitur super desolationem;</q>
dimidium autem hebdomadis tres sunt anni et menses
sex.</note>.
</p>

<p>
He finds him under the <hi rend='italic'>Beast</hi> of the Revelation of
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
St. John, (xvii. 11-14,) who will drive the Church
into the wilderness, and finally be vanquished by our
Lord. He identifies the ten kings who will give
their kingdom to the beast with the ten divisions of
Daniel's fourth kingdom, (Dan. ii. 33,) of whom three
will be killed by Antichrist; and the rest, submitting
to him, will assist him in conquering Babylon, and
burning it with fire: and he makes the stone cut
out without hands to be Christ, who shall destroy
temporal kingdoms, and set up an eternal one, (Dan.
ii. 44, 45<note place='foot'>V. xxvi. 1. Et diligenter Daniel finem quarti Regni digitos
ait pedum esse ejus imaginis, quæ a Nabuchodonosor visa
est, in quos venit lapis sine manibus præcisus; et quemadmodum
ipse ait: <q>Pedes, pars quidem aliqua ferrea, et pars aliqua fictilis;
quoadusque abscissus est lapis sine manibus, et percussit
imaginem in pedes ferreos et fictiles, et comminuit eos usque ad
finem.</q> Post deinde in exsolutione ait: <q>Et quoniam vidisti
pedes et digitos, partem quidem fictilem, partem autem ferream,
regnum divisum erit, et a radice ferrea erit in eo, quemadmodum
vidisti ferrum commixtum testæ. Et digiti pedum, pars quidem
aliqua ferrea, pars autem aliqua fictilis.</q> Ergo decem digiti
pedum, hi sunt decem Reges, in quibus dividetur regnum: ex
quibus quidam quidem fortes et agiles, sive efficaces; alii autem
pigri et inutiles erunt, et non consentient: quemadmodum et
Daniel ait: <q>Pars aliqua regni erit fortis, et ab ipsa pars erit
minuta. Quoniam vidisti ferrum commixtum testæ, commixtiones
erunt in semine hominum, et non erunt adjuncti invicem,
quemadmodum ferrum non commiscetur cum testa.</q> Et quoniam
finis fiet, inquit: <q>Et in diebus Regum illorum excitabit Deus
cœli Regnum, quod in æternum non corrumpetur, et Regnum
ejus alteri populo non relinquetur. Comminuet et ventilabit
omnia regna, et ipsum exaltabitur in æternum. Quemadmodum
vidisti, quoniam de monte præcisus est lapis sine manibus, et
comminuit testam, ferrum, et æramentum, et argentum, et aurum.
Deus magnus significavit Regi, quæ futura sunt post hæc: et verum
est somnium, et fidelis interpretatio ejus.</q>&mdash;2. Si ergo Deus
magnus significavit per Danielem futura, et per Filium confirmavit;
et Christus est lapis, qui præcisus est sine manibus, qui
destruet temporalia Regna, et æternum inducet, quæ est justorum
resurrectio: <q>Resuscitabit,</q> ait, <q>Deus cœli Regnum, quod in
æternum nunquam corrumpetur.</q> See also xxvi. 1. p. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, note.</note>).
</p>

<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>

<p>
Irenæus again sees Antichrist in the <emph>beast</emph> (Rev.
xiii. 2-18) whose head was wounded, who has a
mouth given to him speaking great things, and
receives power for forty and two months; who has
an armour-bearer, called the false prophet, who will
work great miracles by magical power, through the
aid of evil spirits; the number of whose name is
666<note place='foot'>V. xxviii. 2. Cujus adventum Joannes in Apocalypsi significavit
ita: <q>Et bestia quam videram, similis erat pardo....
Si quis gladio occiderit, oportet eum in gladio occidi. Hic est
sustinentia et fides sanctorum.</q> Post deinde et de armigero ejus,
quem et pseudoprophetam vocat: <q>Loquebatur,</q> inquit, <q>quasi
draco, et potestatem primæ bestiæ omnem faciebat in conspectu
ejus: et facit terram, et qui habitant in ea, ut adorarent bestiam
primam, cujus curata est plaga mortis ejus. Et faciet signa
magna, ut et ignem faciat de cœlo descendere in terram in conspectu
hominum, et seducet inhabitantes super terram.</q> Hæc
ne quis eum divina virtute putet signa facere, sed magica operatione.
Et non est mirandum, si dæmoniis et apostaticis spiritibus
ministrantibus ei, per eos faciat signa, in quibus seducat
habitantes super terram. <q>Et imaginem,</q> ait, <q>jubebit fieri
bestiæ, et spiritum dabit imagini, uti et loquatur imago, et eos
qui non adoraverint eam, faciet occidi. Et characterem autem,</q>
ait, <q>in fronte, et in manu dextra faciet dari, ut non possit aliquis
emere vel vendere, nisi qui habet characterem nominis bestiæ, vel
numerum nominis ejus; et esse numerum sexcentos sexaginta
sex, quod est, sexies centeni, et deni sexies, et singulares sex;</q>
in recapitulationem universæ apostasiæ ejus, quæ facta est in
sex millibus annorum.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>

<p>
Respecting this number he enters into a special
discussion, in which he first reproves those who
hastily endeavoured to interpret it<note place='foot'>V. xxx. 1. Καὶ πρῶτον μὲν ζημία ἐν τῷ ἀποτυχεῖν τῆς ἀληθείας,
καὶ τὸ μὴ ὂν ὡς ὂν ὑπολαβεῖν· ἔπειτα δὲ τοῦ προσθέντος ἢ
ἀφελόντος τι τῆς γραφῆς, ἐπιτιμίαν οὐ τὴν τυχοῦσαν ἔχοντος, εἰς
αὐτὴν ἐμπεσεῖν ἀνάγκη τὸν τοιοῦτον. ἐπακολουθήσει δὲ καὶ ἕτερος
οὐχ ὁ τυχὼν κίνδυνος τοῖς ψευδῶς προειληφόσιν εἰδέναι τὸ τοῦ ἀντιχρίστου
ὄνομα· εἰ γὰρ ἄλλο μὲν οὗτοι δοκοῦσιν, ἄλλο δὲ ἐκεῖνος
ἔχων ἐλεύσεται, ῥᾳδίως ἐξαπατηθήσονται παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ· ὡς μηδέπου
παρόντος ἐκείνου, ὃν φυλάσσεσθαι προσήκει.</note>, and then endeavours
to lay down correct principles of interpretation
for it. He suggests that we must wait till the other
signs of Antichrist begin to be fulfilled, such as the
division of the Roman Empire into ten parts, and
the sudden coming of another power to their discomfiture.
We must also remark, he tells us, that
Jeremiah (viii. 16) has foretold that he will be of
the tribe of Dan<note place='foot'>V. xxx. 2. Oportet itaque tales discere, et ad verum recurrere
nominis numerum; ut non in pseudoprophetarum loco deputentur.
Sed scientes firmum numerum qui a Scriptura annuntiatus
est, id est, sexcentorum sexaginta sex, sustineant primum
quidem divisionem Regni in decem: post deinde, illis regnantibus,
et incipientibus corrigere sua negotia et augere suum regnum;
qui de improviso advenerit regnum sibi vindicans, et terrebit
prædictos, habens nomen continens prædictum numerum, hunc
vere cognoscere esse abominationem desolationis. Hoc et Apostolus
ait: <q>Cum dixerint, Pax et munitio, tunc subitaneus illis
superveniet interitus.</q> Hieremias autem non solum subitaneum
ejus adventum, sed et tribum, ex qua veniet, manifestavit dicens:
<q>Ex Dan audiemus vocem velocitatis equorum ejus: a voce
hinnitus decursionis equorum ejus commovebitur tota terra: et
veniet, et manducabit terram, et plenitudinem ejus, et civitatem,
et qui habitant in ea.</q> Et propter hoc non annumeratur tribus
hæc in Apocalypsi cum his quæ salvantur.</note>. We must not be rash in applying
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
the number to any particular individual or power,
for many names will correspond with it, such as
Εὐάνθας, Λατεῖνος, (which he thinks very probable, as
being the name of the last of the four empires,) and
Τειτὰν, for which he suggests many, to his apprehension,
plausible recommendations<note place='foot'>V. xxx. 3. Ἀσφαλέστερον οὖν καὶ ἀκινδυνέτερον, τὸ περιμένειν
τὴν ἔκβασιν τῆς προφητείας, ἢ τὸ καταστοχάζεσθαι, καὶ καταμαντεύεσθαι
ὀνόματος· τυχὸν δὲ ἐπὶ πολλῶν ὀνομάτων εὑρεθῆναι
δυναμένου τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἀριθμοῦ, et nihilominus quidem erit hæc
eadem quæstio. Εἰ γὰρ πολλά ἐστι τὰ εὑρισκόμενα ὀνόματα,
ἔχοντα τὸν αὐτὸν ἀριθμὸν, ποῖον ἐξ αὐτῶν φορέσει ὁ ἐρχόμενος,
ζητηθήσεται. Quoniam autem non propter inopiam nominum
habentium numerum nominis ejus dicimus hæc, sed propter timorem
erga Deum et zelum veritatis: ΕΥΑΝΘΑΣ enim nomen habet
numerum de quo quæritur: sed nihil de eo affirmamus. Sed et
ΛΑΤΕΙΝΟΣ nomen habet sexcentorum sexaginta sex numerum:
et valde verisimile est, quoniam novissimum regnum hoc habet
vocabulum. Latini enim sunt qui nunc regnant: sed non in hoc
nos gloriabimur. Sed et ΤΕΙΤΑΝ, prima syllaba per duas Græcas
vocales ε et ι scripta, omnium nominum quæ apud nos inveniuntur,
magis fide dignum est. Etenim prædictum numerum habet in se,
et literarum est sex, singulis syllabis ex ternis literis constantibus,
et vetus, et semotum; neque enim eorum Regum, qui secundum
nos sunt, aliquis vocatus est Titan; neque eorum, quæ publice
adorantur, idolorum apud Græcos et barbaros habet vocabulum
hoc: et divinum putatur apud multos esse hoc nomen, ut etiam
sol Titan vocetur ab his qui nunc tenent: et ostentationem quandam
continet ultionis, et vindictam inferentis, quod ille simulat se
male tractatos vindicare. Et alias autem et antiquum, et fide
dignum et regale, magis autem et tyrannicum nomen. Cum
igitur tantum suasionum habeat hoc nomen Titan, tamen habet
verisimilitudinem, ut ex multis colligamus ne forte Titan vocetur,
qui veniet. Nos tamen non periclitabimur in eo, nec asseverantes
pronuntiabimus, hoc eum nomen habiturum: scientes, quoniam
si oporteret manifeste præsenti tempore præconari nomen ejus,
per ipsum utique editum fuisset, qui et Apocalypsim viderat.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>

<p>
This is the sum of what he tells us on the subject
of Antichrist; and he declares that when he has
reigned, sitting in the temple of Jerusalem, for three
years and a half, then the Lord will come to judgment,
and to introduce the times of the kingdom of
heaven, and the true Sabbath, in which many shall
come from the east and west, and sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob<note place='foot'>V. xxx. 4. Cum autem vastaverit Antichristus hic omnia in
hoc mundo, regnans annis tribus et mensibus sex, et sederit in
templo Hierosolymis; tunc veniet Dominus de cœlis in nubibus
in gloria Patris, illum quidem et obedientes ei in stagnum ignis
mittens; adducens autem justis Regni tempora, hoc est, requietionem,
septimam diem sanctificatam; et restituens Abrahæ promissionem
hæreditatis: in quo Regno ait Dominus, multos ab
Oriente et Occidente venientes, recumbere cum Abraham, Isaac,
et Jacob.&mdash;&mdash;Ibid. xxxiii. 2. See p. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, note 2.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<p>
It is foreign to my purpose to enter into the probability
or improbability of these interpretations:
but two things strike me as remarkable: first, the
decided identification of the ten horns of <emph>the beast</emph>
with the Roman Empire in a state of division; and
secondly, the admission of the mystical meaning of
<emph>days</emph> in the prophecy of Daniel (viii. 27) as signifying
<emph>years</emph>, coupled with the literal interpretation of
time in other passages; as, for instance, Dan. vii. 25,
and Rev. xiii. 5.
</p>

<p>
When the short reign of Antichrist ceases, the
undisputed reign of Christ (according to Irenæus)
will begin, and will continue a thousand years. For
as the days of creation were six, and the day of rest
one; as moreover one day is with the Lord a
thousand years; this world is destined to endure six
thousand years in this state of turmoil and perplexity<note place='foot'><p>V. xxviii. 3. See p. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, note 1.
</p>
<p>
The very ancient writer under the name of Barnabas, contemporary
at least with Justin Martyr, says, (<hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> § 11.) Προσέχετε,
τέκνα, τί λέγει τό· Συνετέλεσεν ἐν ἓξ ἡμέραις. Τοῦτο λέγει
ὅτι συντελεῖ Κύριος ἐν ἑξακισχιλίοις ἔτεσι τὰ πάντα.</p></note>,
and then will succeed a thousand of rest
and enjoyment<note place='foot'>V. xxx. 4. xxxiii. 2.</note>. When that time arrives, the world
will be restored to its pristine state; the very animals
will all associate together in peace; the just
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
will rise with their bodies, and upon this very earth,
upon which they suffered, will receive the reward of
their endurance<note place='foot'><p>V. xxxii. 1. Quoniam igitur transferuntur quorundam sententiæ
ab hæreticis sermonibus, et sunt ignorantes dispositiones
Dei et mysterium justorum resurrectionis et Regni quod est principium
incorruptelæ, per quod regnum qui digni fuerint paulatim
assuescunt capere Deum; necessarium est autem dicere de illis
quoniam oportet justos primos in conditione hac quæ renovatur,
ad apparitionem Dei resurgentes, recipere promissionem hæreditatis
quam Deus promisit patribus, et regnare in ea; post deinde
fieri judicium. In qua enim conditione laboraverunt sive afflicti
sunt, omnibus modis probati per sufferentiam, justum est in ipsa
recipere eos fructus sufferentiæ.... Oportet ergo et ipsam
conditionem, reintegratam ad pristinum, sine prohibitione servire
justis.&mdash;&mdash;xxxiii. 4. Hæc ergo tempora prophetans Esaias ait:
<q>Et compascetur lupus cum agno, et pardus conquiescet cum
hædo, et vitulus et taurus et leo simul pascentur, et puer pusillus
ducet eos. Et bos et ursus simul pascentur, et simul infantes
eorum erunt: et leo et bos manducabunt paleas. Et puer
infans in cavernam aspidum, et in cubile filiorum aspidum manum
mittet; et non male facient, nec poterunt perdere aliquem in
monte sancto meo.</q> Et iterum recapitulans ait: <q>Tunc lupi et
agni pascentur simul, et leo quasi bos vescetur paleis, serpens
autem terram quasi panem: et non nocebunt neque vexabunt in
monte sancto meo, dicit Dominus.</q> Non ignoro autem, quoniam
quidam hæc in feros, et ex diversis gentibus et variis operibus
credentes, et cum crediderint consentientes justis, tentent transferre.
Sed etsi nunc hoc sit in quibusdam hominibus, ex variis
gentibus in unam sententiam fidei venientibus, nihilominus in
resurrectione justorum super iis animalibus, quemadmodum dictum
est: dives enim in omnibus Deus. Et oportet conditione
revocata, obedire et subjecta esse omnia animalia homini, et ad
primam a Deo datam reverti escam, (quemadmodum autem in
obedientia subjecta erant Adæ,) fructum terræ. Alias autem et
non est nunc ostendere leonem paleis vesci. Hoc autem significabat
magnitudinem et pinguedinem fructuum. Si enim leo
animal paleis vescitur; quale ipsum triticum erit, cujus palea ad
escam congrua erit leonum?
</p>
<p>
Theophilus <hi rend='italic'>ad Autolycum</hi>, II. 25. Ὁπόταν οὖν πάλιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος
ἀναδράμῃ εἰς τὸ κατὰ φύσιν, μηκέτι κακοποιῶν; κακεῖνα (i. e.
τὰ θηρία) ἀποκατασταθήσεται εἰς τὴν ἀρχῆθεν ἡμερέτητα.</p></note>. Then shall Abraham receive,
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
fully and literally, the promise made to him and to
his seed, i. e. the Church, and shall really enjoy his
inheritance from the river of Egypt to the great
Euphrates<note place='foot'>V. xxxii. 2. <q>Semini tuo dabo terram hanc, a flumine
Ægypti usque ad flumen magnum Euphratem.</q> Si ergo huic
[Abraham] promisit Deus hæreditatem terræ non accepit autem
in omni suo incolatu; oportet eum accipere cum semine suo, hoc
est, qui timent Deum et credunt in eum, in resurrectione justorum.
Semen autem ejus Ecclesia, per Dominum adoptionem quæ est
ad Deum accipiens.... Neque Abraham neque semen
ejus, hoc est, qui ex fide justificantur, nunc sumunt in ea hæreditatem;
accipient autem eam in resurrectione justorum.</note>. Then shall Jesus drink the fruit of the
vine new with his disciples<note place='foot'>V. xxxiii. 1. Promisit bibere de generatione vitis cum suis
discipulis; utrumque ostendens, et hæreditatem terræ in qua
bibitur nova generatio vitis, et carnalem resurrectionem discipulorum
ejus: quæ enim nova resurgit caro, ipsa est quæ et novum
percipit poculum. Neque autem sursum in supercœlesti loco
constitutus cum suis potest intelligi bibens vitis generationem;
neque rursus sine carne sunt, qui bibant illud: carnis enim proprium
est, et non spiritus, qui ex vite accipitur potus.&mdash;&mdash;2. See
p. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, note 2.</note>; for there shall be no
more labour, but there shall be a continual table
prepared by a creative hand, by the incredible productiveness
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
of the fruits of the earth<note place='foot'>V. xxxiii. 2. supra.&mdash;3. Prædicta itaque benedictio ad tempora
Regni sine contradictione pertinet, quando regnabunt justi surgentes
a mortuis: quando et creatura renovata, et liberata, multitudinem
fructificabit universæ escæ, ex rore cœli, et ex fertilitate
terræ.&mdash;See p. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, note 5.</note>. Then shall
the righteous hold intercourse and communion with
Angels<note place='foot'>V. xxxv. 1. Regnabunt justi in terra, crescentes ex visione
Domini, et per ipsum assuescent capere gloriam Dei Patris, et
cum sanctis Angelis conversationem et communionem, et unitatem
spiritalium in Regno capient: et illos quos Dominus in
carne inveniet, exspectantes eum de cœlis, et perpessos tribulationem,
qui et effugerint iniqui manus.</note> in Jerusalem, which shall be then rebuilt<note place='foot'>V. xxxv. 2. In Regni temporibus, revocata terra a Christo,
et reædificata Hierusalem, secundum characterem quæ sursum
est Hierusalem.</note>.
</p>

<p>
This state of things he believed, as I have said,
would last a thousand years; and he adopted this
view, not for want of knowing that there was an
allegorical interpretation, but because he thought it
forced and unnatural, and labouring under irremediable
difficulties<note place='foot'>V. xxxiii. 4. supra.&mdash;xxxv. 1. Si autem quidam tentaverint
allegorizare hæc, quæ ejusmodi sunt; neque de omnibus poterunt
consonantes sibimetipsis inveniri, et convincentur ab ipsis dictionibus.&mdash;2.
Et nihil allegorizari potest, sed omnia firma, et vera,
et substantiam habentia, ad fruitionem hominum justorum a Deo
facta. Quomodo enim vere Deus est, qui resuscitat hominem;
sic et vere resurgit homo a mortuis, et non allegorice, quemadmodum
per tanta ostendimus. Et sicut vere resurgit, sic et vere
præmeditabitur [μελετήσεται&mdash;sese exercebit in] incorruptelam,
et augebitur, et vigebit in Regni temporibus, ut fiat capax gloriæ
Patris. Deinde omnibus renovatis, vere in civitate habitabit
Dei.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>

<p>
And when the thousand years were ended, he
believed that the great day of judgment would come,
and the general resurrection, when the New Jerusalem
would descend from heaven, of which the
former Jerusalem, in which the just were prepared
for immortality, would have been but an image<note place='foot'>V. xxxv. 2. His itaque prætereuntibus super terram, novam
superiorem Hierusalem ait Domini discipulus Joannes descendere,
quemadmodum sponsam ornatam viro suo; et hoc esse tabernaculum
Dei, in quo inhabitabit Deus cum hominibus. Hujus
Hierusalem imago illa, quæ in priori terra, Hierusalem, in qua
justi præmeditantur incorruptelam, et parantur in salutem. Et
hujus tabernaculi typum accepit Moyses in monte.</note>.
Then will there be new heavens and a new earth, in
which man will for ever converse with God. But
there will not be only one abode of the righteous:
some will ascend into heaven above the angels;
others will enjoy the delights of a paradise<note place='foot'>V. xxxvi 1. Παρελθόντος δὲ τοῦ σχήματος τούτου, καὶ ἀνανεωθέντος
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, καὶ ἀκμάσαντος πρὸς τὴν ἀφθαρσίαν, ὥστε
μηκέτι δύνασθαι πέρα παλαιωθῆναι, ἔσται ὁ οὐρανὸς καινὸς, καὶ ἡ
γῆ καινή· ἐν τοῖς καινοῖς ἀναμενεῖ ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἀεὶ καινὸς, καὶ προσομιλῶν
τῷ Θεῷ· ... φησὶν γὰρ Ησαΐας· Ὅν τρόπον γὰρ ὁ
οὐρανὸς καινὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ καινῆ, ἃ ἐγὼ ποιῶ, μένει ἐνώπιον ἐμοῦ,
λέγει Κύριος, οὔτω στήσεται τὸ σπέρμα ὑμῶν καὶ τὸ ὄνομα ὑμῶν ...
ὡς οἱ πρεσβύτεροι λέγουσι, τότε καὶ οἱ μὲν καταξιωθέντες τῆς ἐν
οὐρανῷ διατριβῆς, ἐκεῖσε χωρήσουσιν, οἱ δὲ τῆς τοῦ παραδείσου
τρυφῆς ἀπολαύσουσιν, οἱ δὲ τὴν λαμπρότητα τῆς πόλεως καθέξουσιν·
πανταχοῦ γὰρ ὁ Σωτὴρ ὁραθήσεται, καθὼς ἄξιοι ἔσονται οἱ ὁρῶντες
αὐτόν.</note>; but all
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
will have the continual manifestation of the presence
of God, and be changed into his likeness<note place='foot'>V. xxxvi. 3. Ut progenies ejus, primogenitus Verbum, descendat
in facturam, hoc est, in plasma, et capiatur ab eo; et
factura iterum capiat Verbum, et ascendat ad eum, supergrediens
Angelos, et fiet secundum imaginem et similitudinem Dei.</note>.
</p>

<p>
This, I believe, is a correct view of the opinions
of Irenæus as to certain departments of unfulfilled
prophecy. I offer upon them no opinion of my own;
but it is right to say that he was by no means
singular in his own age<note place='foot'><p>Justin Martyr, <hi rend='italic'>Dial. cum Tryph.</hi> 80, makes Tryphon ask the
question: Εἰπὲ δὲ μοι ἀληθῶς, ὑμεῖς ἀνοικοδομηθῆναι τὸν τόπον
Ἰερουσαλὴμ τοῦτον ὁμολογεῖτε, καὶ συναχθήσεσθαι τὸν λαὸν ὑμῶν,
καὶ εὐφρανθῆναι σὺν τῷ Χριστῷ ἅμα τοῖς πατριάρχαις καὶ τοῖς
προφήταις καὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡμετέρου γένους ἢ καὶ τῶν προσηλύτων,
πρὶν ἐλθεῖν ὑμῶν τὸν Χριστὸν, προσδοκᾶτε; And to this Justin
replies, Ὡμολόγησα οὖν σοι καὶ πρότερον, ὅτι ἐγὼ μὲν καὶ ἄλλοι
πολλοὶ ταῦτα φρονοῦμεν, ὡς καὶ πάντως ἐπίστασθε, τοῦτο γενησόμενον·
πολλοὺς δ᾽ αὖ καὶ τῶν τῆς καθαρᾶς καὶ εὐσεβοῦς ὄντων Χριστιανῶν
γνώμης τοῦτο μὴ γνωρίζειν ἐσήμανά σοι. And further on:
Ἐγὼ δὲ, καὶ εἰ τινές εἰσιν ὀρθογνώμονες κατὰ πάντα Χριστιανοὶ
καὶ σαρκὸς ἀνάστασιν γενήσεσθαι ἐπιστάμεθα· καὶ χίλια ἔτη ἐν
Ἰερουσαλὴμ οἰκοδομηθείσῃ καὶ κοσμηθείσῃ καὶ πλατυνθείσῃ οἱ προφῆται
Ἰεζεκιὴλ καὶ Ησαΐας καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι ὁμολογοῦσιν.&mdash;Perhaps
I ought to notice, that some persons have supposed Justin in this
last passage to assert, that orthodox Christians in general taught
the doctrine of the personal reign, and thence have imagined
a discrepancy between the latter statement and that immediately
preceding: but a little attention will show, that all he asserts
concerning orthodox Christians in general is, that they believe
the resurrection of the flesh; and he further adds, that <emph>the prophets</emph>
taught that Jerusalem was to be rebuilt, and to remain a
thousand years inhabited by the just.
</p>
<p>
Tertullian. <hi rend='italic'>advers. Marcion.</hi> III. 24. Nam et confitemur in terra
nobis regnum repromissum; sed ante cœlum, sed alio statu; utpote
post resurrectionem in mille annos, in civitate divini operis Hierusalem
cœlo delata.&mdash;See also Barnabas and Theophilus, quoted
pp. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> &amp; <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>.</p></note>, and that there is no writer
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
of any importance, down to the time of Origen, who
impugned the doctrine of the personal reign of Christ
on earth. After that time, that doctrine became
more and more unpopular in the Church at large;
although many, from time to time, have advocated
views more or less in accordance with those of the
primitive millenarians.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XX. The Virgin Mary.</head>

<p>
There are two passages of Irenæus, in which the
name of the Blessed Virgin is introduced, which
would not have called for any particular remark,
were it not for the manner in which they are perverted
by Romanist writers, and especially by the
Benedictine editor, Massuet, in support of the blasphemous
honour they bestow on her. When, however,
we have examined them, we shall perceive
that, although they may, no doubt, to those whose
minds are imbued with superstitious prejudice, at
first sight appear to countenance that prejudice, they
do not really favour it.
</p>

<p>
The first of these passages affirms that <q>as Eve,
having Adam for her husband, but being still a virgin
... being disobedient, became both to herself
and to the whole human race the cause of death; so
also Mary, having her destined husband and yet
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
a virgin, being obedient, became both to herself and
to the whole human race the cause of salvation<note place='foot'>III. xxii. 4. Maria virgo obediens invenitur, dicens: <q>Ecce
ancilla tua, Domine, fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum:</q> Eva
vero inobediens; non obedivit enim, adhuc cum esset virgo.
Quemadmodum illa, virum quidem habens Adam, virgo tamen
adhuc existens ... inobediens facta, et sibi et universo
generi humano causa facta est mortis; sic et Maria habens prædestinatum
virum, et tamen virgo, obediens, et sibi et universo
generi humano causa facta est salutis.... Sic autem et
Evæ inobedientiæ nodus solutionem accepit per obedientiam
Mariæ: quod enim alligavit virgo Eva per incredulitatem, hoc
virgo Maria solvit per fidem.</note>.</q>
There seems no difficulty in granting all this, and
yet the conclusion by no means follows that the
Blessed Virgin is to be regarded as a mediatrix and
intercessor with God, next after her Son<note place='foot'>Massuet, <hi rend='italic'>Diss. Præv.</hi> III. § 65. Nostræ salutis prima post
Filium mediatrix ... mediatricis conciliatricisque cum
Deo.</note>. Eve was
certainly the cause of death to the whole human
race, because through her transgression Adam was
made to transgress; and in him all mankind are
made sinners. But it does not appear that original
sin came to all mankind directly from Eve, or that
she was any otherwise the cause of death to our race,
except by bringing Adam into the transgression:
otherwise we must suppose that our Lord, being
born of a woman, must have inherited a sinful nature;
for even Massuet does not make the Virgin
sinless. As the transgression of Eve therefore, although
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
no doubt her own act, was only instrumentally
and indirectly the cause of our condemnation,
so the obedience of the Virgin Mary, although her
own act, was only instrumentally and indirectly the
cause of our salvation, that is, by leading to the incarnation
and birth of our Lord<note place='foot'>And so Justin Martyr puts it in a parallel passage to this of
Irenæus: <hi rend='italic'>Tryph.</hi> 100. Παρθένος οὖσα Εὔα, τὸν λόγον τὸν ἀπὸ
τοῦ ὄφεως συλλαβοῦσα, παρακοὴν καὶ θάνατον ἔτεκε· πίστιν δὲ καὶ
χαρὰν λαβοῦσα Μαρία ἡ παρθένος, εὐαγγελιζομένου αὐτῇ Γαβριὴλ
ἀγγέλου, ... ἀπεκρίνατο· Γένοιτό μοι κατὰ τὸ ῥῆμά
σου. Καὶ διὰ ταύτης γεγένηται οὗτος ... δι᾽ οὗ ὁ Θεὸς τὸν
ὄφιν ... καταλύει, ἀπαλλαγὴν δὲ τοῦ θανάτου ...
ἐργάζεται.</note>. And if so, there
is no foundation whatever for making her a mediatrix
and intercessor with God.
</p>

<p>
But still stronger reliance appears to be placed
upon the next passage, in which the Virgin Mary is
called <q>the <emph>advocate</emph> of the Virgin Eve<note place='foot'>V. xix. 1. Quemadmodum enim illa per angeli sermonem
seducta est, ut effugeret Deum, prævaricata verbum ejus; ita et
hæc per angelicum sermonem evangelizata est, ut portaret Deum,
obediens ejus verbo. Et si ea inobedierat Deo, sed hæc suasa
est obedire Deo, uti virginis Evæ virgo Maria fieret advocata.
Et quemadmodum adstrictum est morti genus humanum per virginem,
salvatur per virginem; æqua lance disposita, virginalis
inobedientia per virginalem obedientiam.</note>.</q> And yet
that very passage supplies a proof that this term
cannot be taken otherwise than in a figurative and
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
improper sense: for Irenæus therein asserts that <q>as
the human race was condemned to death through a
virgin, so it is <emph>saved</emph> through a virgin;</q> i. e. as he
himself explains it, through her submission to the
angelic announcement of the will of God, that his
Son should be born of her. Now it would be clear
blasphemy to ascribe our <emph>salvation</emph> to the Virgin
otherwise than in a figurative sense, as being an instrument
in the divine hand for its accomplishment
by becoming the mother of the real Saviour; and
so, in the same figurative sense she was the advocate
of Eve, by becoming the mother of him who was
really her advocate. The figure is, no doubt, rather
bold, but still it is evidently but a figure.
</p>

<p>
This interpretation indeed is so obvious, that to
us, who have no such prejudices as the members of
the Roman Church, it would have been unnecessary
to insist upon it, were it not for the violent perversion
of the passage by their writers. It is, perhaps,
worthy of more distinct indication, that Irenæus,
by declaring that the Blessed Virgin was the
cause of salvation to <emph>herself</emph>, as well as to others<note place='foot'>III. xxii. 4.</note>,
directly contradicts the idea held by some in the
Roman Church, (and I believe in the Greek likewise,)
that she was entirely sinless. On the other
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
hand, he undoubtedly countenances (although he does
not use) the appellation given to her by many, of the
<emph>mother of God</emph><note place='foot'>V. xix. 1. ... ut portaret Deum.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXI. Account of the Gnostic Teachers and Their
Tenets.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section I. Simon Magus, Nicolas, and the Ebionites.</head>

<p>
Several writers have speculated upon the sources
of the Gnostic errors; but, I believe that the assertion
of Irenæus remains uncontradicted, that <hi rend='smallcaps'>Simon
Magus</hi> was the first to give them a definite form<note place='foot'>I. xxiii. 2. xxvii. 4. II. Præf. 1. III. Præf.</note>.
We learn from Theodoret<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> I. 1. He calls the Great Original a twofold Fire,
hidden and apparent, and he gives the names of the Pairs who
proceeded from this Fire, as Νοῦς καὶ Ἐπίνοια, Φωνὴ καὶ Ἔννοια,
Λογισμὸς καὶ Ἐνθύμησις.</note>, Elias Cretensis<note place='foot'>Ad Gregor. Naz. <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> xxiii. The names he gives are
Βυθὸς καὶ Σιγὴ, Νοῦς καὶ Ἀλήθεια, Λόγος καὶ Ζωὴ, Ἄνθρωπος καὶ
Ἐκκλησία.</note>, and
Nicetas<note place='foot'>Ad ejusdem <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> xliv.</note>, that he imagined an ogdoad of superior
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
beings, all the rest of whom emanated from the first.
He imagined one First Cause, the source of all existence,
with whom he joined his Thought (Ἔννοια).
Irenæus mentions no more than these<note place='foot'>I. xxiii. 2.</note>. Simon
taught that this Thought, issuing forth from the
Supreme Father, and knowing his intentions, descended
from above, and produced the Angels and
Powers by whom the world was made, and who
were ignorant of the Father: that they, not wishing
to acknowledge any author of their existence, detained
her, and subjected her to every kind of contumely,
to prevent her return to the Father, and
caused her to exist in this world in perpetual transmigration
from one female form to another.
</p>

<p>
He taught that he himself was this Supreme
Father<note place='foot'>I. xxiii. 1. II. ix. 2.</note>, and a prostitute, named Helena, whom he
had purchased at Tyre, and with whom he cohabited,
was his Thought, who had been formerly the Trojan
Helen: that she was the lost sheep<note place='foot'>I. xxiii. 2.</note>, and that he
was come down upon earth to rescue her from the
bondage in which she was held; and to rescue man
by the knowledge of himself from the tyranny they
were under to the angels who created the world.
This tyranny was obedience to the moral law, which
was imposed upon man by the agency of the inspired
persons of the old dispensation solely to keep him in
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
subjection: and the deliverance he accomplished for
his followers was to bring them to believe that all
actions were indifferent in their own nature, and
that the will of the Creative Powers was the only
thing which made one action more just than another.
To do away with this tyranny, he declared that he
had transformed himself first into a resemblance to
the angels, then into that of man; in which latter
form he had appeared in Judæa as the Son, and there
apparently suffered; but only apparently<note place='foot'>I. xxiii. 1. 3.</note>; that he
had afterwards manifested himself to the Samaritans
as the Father, and to the rest of the world as the
Holy Ghost<note place='foot'>I. xxiii. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Irenæus gives it as his own opinion that the conversion
of Simon was only pretended; that he regarded
the Apostles as nothing more than impostors
or sorcerers of a somewhat deeper skill and subtler
knowledge than himself, which he hoped to be initiated
into: and that his mortification at the rebuff he
met with caused him to set himself in opposition to
them, and to dive deeper into magic arts for that
purpose; on account of his proficiency in which he
was honoured by Claudius Cæsar with a statue<note place='foot'>I. xxiii. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The natural fruits followed from such doctrines
and such an example. The priests of his heresy
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
were sorcerers of various degrees of ability, and their
lives were very impure. They taught their followers
to worship Simon under the form of Jupiter, and
Helena under that of Minerva<note place='foot'>1. xxiii. 4.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious that such a scheme was adapted only
to the gross and ignorant, with just enough of mysticism
about it to enable its founder to keep up the
character of a philosopher with the more refined,
and enable him to pass off his lewdness as the result
of a philosophical system, rather than the dominion
of low propensities. The Emperor Claudius, notorious
as a man of weak intellect, was an extremely
likely person to be both amused and duped by his
magical performances.
</p>

<p>
We have here the germ of all the Antinomian
heresies from that time to the present. However
they may have been <emph>espoused</emph> by refined and virtuous
minds, they all originate with persons of impure and
unbridled propensities, who are unwilling to avow
the real grossness of their characters, and therefore
set up for some deeper knowledge or more subtle
system than ordinary men.
</p>

<p>
It will be observed, too, that Irenæus confirms the
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
statement of Justin Martyr respecting the statue
erected in honour of Simon<note place='foot'>I. xxiii. 1.</note>. The subject is so well
taken up by the late Dr. E. Burton, in the 42nd
note to his Bampton Lectures, that I do not purpose
to enter into it here, further than to remark that
Irenæus ought not to be regarded as merely <emph>following</emph>
Justin: for he himself had visited Rome, and
was therefore likely to have informed himself personally
upon a subject which he thought sufficiently
important to bring forward in controversy.
</p>

<p>
It is likewise a fact deserving notice, that the first
instance we have of the worship of images amongst
persons recognizing in any degree the gospel, is to
be found amongst the followers of Simon Magus.
Something of this kind probably suggested St. John's
caution: <q>Little children, keep yourselves from
idols.</q>
</p>

<p>
Concerning <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nicolas</hi>, the author, whether intentionally
or not, of the sect which bears his name<note place='foot'>Clem. Alex. <emph>Strom.</emph> II. 20. § 118. III. 4. § 25.</note>,
he informs us that he was one of the seven deacons,
which some have doubted. He gives us no additional
information concerning the sect, beyond that
furnished by St. John<note place='foot'>I. xxvi. 3.</note>. This, however, connects
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
them with the Gnostics in their licentious doctrines,
and no further.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ebionites</hi> are mentioned by Irenæus, as
though he meant to class them with the Gnostics:
but all the information he gives respecting them
leads to the conclusion that they had nothing in
common with them, except their schism. He expressly
states that they believed differently from the
Gnostics, and agreed with Christians as to the
creation of the world; and that they differed from
Cerinthus and Carpocrates on the subject of the
miraculous conception<note place='foot'>I. xxvi. 2.</note>. Tertullian<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Virg. Vel.</hi> 6. <hi rend='italic'>De Carne Christi</hi>, 13.</note> indeed implies
that Ebion denied this latter fact; and Eusebius distinctly
asserts of the great body of his followers, that
they thought, as Carpocrates and Cerinthus did, that
Jesus was a mere man, and exalted for his excellence
like other men<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> III. 27.</note>: but he states, and Theodoret<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> II. 1. Τὸν δὲ Σωτῆρα καὶ Κύριον ἐκ παρθένου γεγεννῆσθαι
φησίν.</note>
confirms his statement, that there were Ebionites
who believed the miraculous conception.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section II. Menander, Saturninus, And Basilides.</head>

<p>
The succession of heresy, unlike that of the Church,
had not for its object the keeping up of one uniform
system of doctrine, but the exhibition of something
sufficiently attractive or striking to prevent the
minds of men from dwelling upon the truth. It
required <emph>leaders</emph>, and therefore persons remarkable
for ability of some kind or another. A successor
was therefore provided to Simon in the person of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Menander</hi>, a Samaritan like himself<note place='foot'>I. xxiii. 5.</note>, and, as Justin
informs us, his pupil<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> I. 26.</note>; but whose great qualification
was, that he equalled or excelled his master in the
knowledge of magic<note place='foot'>Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> III. xxvi. 1.</note>. Heresy, likewise, not requiring
to be uniform, permitted its successive teachers to
improve upon the system of their predecessors; and by
this means both satisfied the natural love of mankind
for novelty, and kept up the appetite. So Menander
differed a little from Simon, at least in expression,
in saying that the Supreme Essence was unknown to
all men. He likewise introduced another <emph>name</emph> from
the Gospel, representing himself, not as the Supreme
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
Being, either personally or by direct emanation and
operation, (as Simon did,) but as the Saviour, <emph>sent</emph> by
the unseen Powers for the salvation of man. He
likewise taught his followers, that by the magical
practices in which he instructed them, they might
even <emph>vanquish</emph> the Angelic Creators of this lower
world, which was somewhat more than Simon promised.
</p>

<p>
It appears likewise that he initiated his followers
by <emph>baptism</emph>, which he represented as the true and
only resurrection, and taught them to believe that
after receiving it they could neither grow old nor
die<note place='foot'>I. xxiii. 5.</note>. How he got over the fact that they did both,
we are not informed: but this making baptism the
same thing as the resurrection, explains St. Paul's
words<note place='foot'>1 Tim. ii, 17, 18.</note>, where he represents some as teaching that
<q>the resurrection is already past.</q> Hymenæus and
Philetus, who spread this error in all probability in
Asia Minor, might easily have been disciples of
Menander, who made Antioch his head quarters<note place='foot'>Justin. <hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> I. 26.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Menander was succeeded by two of his pupils<note place='foot'>Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> IV. vii. 2. Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>de Anima</hi>, 23,
mentions Saturninus as the pupil of Menander.</note>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Saturninus</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Basilides</hi>, who, though taking up
the same general system, were very different men,
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
and therefore modified it in different ways, and were
employed by their invisible master in different parts
of <emph>his</emph> vineyard.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Saturninus</hi> remained at Antioch, teaching the
same general doctrine as his preceptor Menander.
He defined the number of the angels by whom the
world was made to be seven<note place='foot'>I. xxiv. 1.</note>, one of whom was the
God of the Jews; and he introduced one of the
remaining angels, who had not been concerned in
the creation, under the name of Satan, as the opponent
of the Creators, and more especially of the God
of the Jews<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2.</note>. He represented the creation of man
as having taken place at the suggestion of the
Supreme Power, who exhibited to the angels a
bright image of himself; which, as he immediately
drew it up again to himself, they endeavoured to
copy, and thus made man <emph>after its image and likeness</emph>:
but not having the power to make him erect, he
would have grovelled on the earth like a worm, had
not the Supreme Power, taking compassion on this
poor copy of himself, sent forth into it a spark of
life, which gave it limbs and an erect posture<note place='foot'>Ibid. 1.</note>. By
an unaccountable inconsistency, however, (for having
a system to make or improve at pleasure, he might
as well have made its parts consistent with each
other,) he likewise taught that there were at first
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
created two sorts of men, one of which was not
enkindled with the celestial spark: that those alone
would be saved who possessed it<note place='foot'>I. xxiv. 2.</note>; and that when
they died, this heavenly portion of them would
ascend to the Powers above, and the other portions
of their nature would be dissolved<note place='foot'>Ibid. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The cause of the coming of the Saviour, or <emph>Christ</emph>,
as they also called him, (who was unborn, incorporeal,
and man only in appearance,) he declared to
be the conspiracy of all the Angelic Princes, headed
by the Jewish God, against the Supreme Father;
which obliged him to come down to destroy the God
of the Jews, together with demons and wicked men,
and to save those who believed in him, that is, those
who had received the spark of life. Who these
demons were, or whether the whole of the angels
were to be destroyed, we are not told<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The prophecies of the Old Testament he attributed
partly to the Creators and partly to Satan<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It is evident that this is merely a modification of
the scheme of Simon Magus, with the addition of
<emph>Satan</emph>, and <emph>the Jewish God</emph>, and <emph>the spark of life</emph>: but
there is another feature of his system which is
remarkable, as differing widely from that of his
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
predecessors. Instead of opening the door to unbridled
lust, he affected an extraordinary repugnance
to every thing carnal, declaring marriage and its natural
consequences to be works of Satan; and some
of his followers entirely abstain from animal food<note place='foot'>I. xxiv. 2.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Basilides</hi><note place='foot'>Clem. Alex. (<hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> VII. 17. § 106, 107.) speaks of Basilides
as being a good deal younger than Marcion, and about the same
age as Valentinus.</note>, the other successor of Menander, settled
at Alexandria in Egypt. He was, as I have
said, a man of very different character from Saturninus,
and followed his master in his addiction to
magical practices, and in his licentious doctrines;
teaching likewise that meats offered to idols were to
be eaten indifferently with others<note place='foot'>I. xxiv. 5.</note>.
</p>

<p>
But that he might have something of his own, he
greatly modified and added to the speculative system
of his predecessors. He taught that from the Unborn
Father was born his Mind, and from him the
Word, from him Understanding (Φρόνησις), from him
Wisdom and Power, and from them Excellences,
and Princes, and Angels, who made a heaven. He
then introduced a successive series of angelic beings,
each set derived from the preceding one, to the number
of 365, and each the author of their own peculiar
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
heaven<note place='foot'>I. xxiv. 3.</note>. To all these angels and heavens he
gave names<note place='foot'>Ibid. 5.</note>, and assigned the local situations of the
heavens. The first of them is called Abraxas, a
mystical name containing in it the number 365<note place='foot'>Ibid. 7.</note>;
the last and lowest is the one which we see; the
Creators of which made this world, and divided its
parts and nations amongst them. In this division
the Jewish nation came to the share of the Prince
of the Angels; and as he wished to bring all other
nations into subjection to his favourite nation, the
other angelic Princes and their nations resisted him
and his nation<note place='foot'>The Prophecies, like Simon, he attributed to the Angels in
general, but the Law to their Chief. § 5.</note>. The Supreme Father, seeing this
state of things, sent his first-begotten Mind, who is
also called Christ, to deliver those who should believe
in him from the power of the Creators. He
accordingly appeared to mankind as a man, and
wrought mighty deeds. He did not, however, really
suffer, but changed forms with Simon of Cyrene,
and stood by laughing whilst Simon suffered; and
afterwards, being himself incorporeal, ascended into
heaven. Building upon this transformation, Basilides
taught his disciples that they might at all times
deny him that was crucified, and that they alone
who did so understood the providential dealings of
the Most High, and by that <emph>knowledge</emph> were freed
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
from the power of the angels, whilst those who confessed
him remained under their power<note place='foot'>I. xxiv. 4.</note>. Like Saturninus,
however, but in other words, he asserted
that the soul alone was capable of salvation, but the
body necessarily perishable<note place='foot'>Ibid. 5.</note>.
</p>

<p>
He taught, moreover, that they who knew his
whole system, and could recount the names of the
angels, &amp;c., were invisible to them all, and could
pass through and see them, without being seen in
return: that they ought likewise to keep themselves
individually and personally unknown to common
men, and even to deny that they are what they are;
that they should assert themselves to be neither
Jews nor Christians, and by no means reveal their
mysteries<note place='foot'>Ibid. 6.</note>. This, of course, and their unscrupulousness
as to actions of any kind whatever, would entirely
exempt them from persecution.
</p>

<p>
It appears likewise, from a fragment preserved in
Origen's <hi rend='italic'>Commentary on the Romans</hi><note place='foot'>Lib. V. cap. 5. See the Appendix to the Benedictine edition
of Irenæus.</note>, that he taught
the transmigration of souls. He affirmed that the
martyrs suffered for offences committed at some
other time: for he thought it contrary to the divine
justice that any innocent person should suffer<note place='foot'>Clem. Alex. <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> IV. 12. § 83.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>

<p>
In this scheme we find a feature, which was afterwards
taken up and amplified, viz., the connection of
mystical numbers with Gnosticism.
</p>

<p>
It is likewise curious to observe how much of the
Gospel history and phraseology was interwoven with
it, without one single atom of its purity and regenerating
influence.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section III. Carpocrates And Cerinthus.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Carpocrates</hi> is placed by Irenæus next to Basilides<note place='foot'>I. xxv. 1.</note>:
but as there is a general agreement amongst
the early writers that Carpocrates was prior to Cerinthus<note place='foot'>The writer of the Appendix to Tertull. <hi rend='italic'>de Præscrip. Hær.</hi> 48.
Epiphan. <hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> xxviii. 2. See also Lampe, <hi rend='italic'>Proleg. in Joan.</hi> II.
3. 2. p. 184, quoted in Burton's <hi rend='italic'>Bampton Lectures</hi>, note 75.</note>,
and that the latter flourished in the last years
of St. John, it appears most probable that Carpocrates
was, if any thing, earlier than Basilides, and more
properly coeval with Menander. In favour of this
idea there is this internal argument, that his system
does not appear to be in any degree an amplification
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
or alteration of that of Basilides, but rather to have
been an independent modification of the original
scheme of Simon.
</p>

<p>
He agreed with him, and Menander, and Basilides,
in professing magic<note place='foot'>I. xxv. 3.</note>, and in preaching licentious
doctrines. He agreed with Simon likewise in teaching
the doctrine of the transmigration of souls, and
adapted it to the support of profligacy, by asserting
that every soul is destined to become acquainted
with every kind of action, and that it passes from
body to body until it has accomplished every thing
to which it is predestined<note place='foot'>Ibid. 4.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Like all other Gnostics, he asserted that the world
and human bodies were made by Angels<note place='foot'>At least this is implied in § 4.</note>; he agreed
with some in teaching that all souls were originally
in the same <emph>sphere</emph> (περιφορὰ) as the Supreme Being<note place='foot'>He said (§ 2) that they were in the same sphere as Jesus,
who (§ 1) was from the same as the Father.</note>,
but that when once placed in bodies, they continued
under the power of the Angels, until they had fulfilled
their destined task; that when a person died,
his soul was brought before the Prince of the Angels,
by the Devil, and if it had not accomplished every
thing, was handed over to another Angel, to be
inclosed again in a body; but that when it has fulfilled
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
its destiny they have no longer any power over
it, but it returns to the Father, from whom it
originally came<note place='foot'>I. xxv. 4.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Unlike Simon, however, or any whom I have yet
mentioned, (except, perhaps, Ebion) he taught that
Jesus was a mere man, the son of Joseph; that
being brought up in the Jews' religion, remembering
what he had been when in the same sphere with the
Father, and being of an unusually firm and resolute
mind, he looked down upon the Angels, and set at
nought bodily suffering<note place='foot'>Ibid. 1.</note>. But his followers thought
that there was no reason why any individual man
might not surpass Jesus, and that, in point of fact,
many of their sect were superior to the Apostles.
Others went so far as to affirm, that the Apostles
were not at all inferior to Jesus, and that if any man
whatever could attain to a greater degree of contempt
for the Creators than Jesus arrived at, he
would become superior to him<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2.</note>.
</p>

<p>
They affirmed that we are to be saved by faith
and love; all actions being good or bad only according
to human opinion; and that Jesus taught their
system as an esoteric doctrine to the Apostles, who
delivered it to those who were worthy<note place='foot'>Ibid. 5.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>

<p>
Some branded their followers upon the right
ear<note place='foot'>I. xxv. 6.</note>.
</p>

<p>
I mentioned before that the first worship of
images arose amongst heretics: and it is remarkable
that heretics again, viz. the Carpocratians, were the
first to pay honour to the image of Christ, whom
they worshipped equally with Pythagoras, and Plato,
and Aristotle, with the same kind of honour as that
which was customary amongst the heathen<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>.
</p>

<p>
One of the female followers of Carpocrates, by
name Marcellina, is said to have visited Rome in
the time of Anicetus, and to have seduced many<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Respecting <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cerinthus</hi>, whom we know from Irenæus
to have been a contemporary of St. John<note place='foot'>III. iii. 4. See p. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>.</note>, the
information he furnishes is very slight. He did not
attribute the Creation to the Angels in a body, but
to some one Power far removed from the Supreme
Power. He made Jesus a mere man, but more excellent
than other men: he affirmed that the Christ
had descended upon him at baptism, and made
known to him the unknown Father, and empowered
him to work miracles, but that he departed from him
before the crucifixion, and left him to suffer alone<note place='foot'>I. xxvi. 1.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section IV. Cerdon, Marcion, Tatian, And The Cainites.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cerdon</hi> would seem to be another independent
offset from the stock of Simon. He likewise taught
a Supreme God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and another inferior deity, who inspired the
prophets<note place='foot'>I. xxvii. 1. The Author of the Appendix to Tertullian's
Treatise <hi rend='italic'>de Præs.</hi> (§ 51.) makes these two Primary Beings; but
Irenæus declares that the former was unknown, the latter known;
the former good, the latter merely just.</note>. He joined the church at Rome under
Hyginus, its bishop, i. e. about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 141, and appears
to have wished by all means to remain in its communion;
and accordingly he recanted his error. He
could not, however, refrain from spreading it covertly,
and being detected, he again recanted; still
he kept his heresy, and being at length judged incorrigible,
he was withheld from the communion of
the Church<note place='foot'>III. iv. 3.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Marcion</hi> succeeded Cerdon<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria mentions Marcion as being in <emph>time</emph>
the successor of Simon Magus, (<hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> VII. 17. § 107,) and
predecessor of Basilides and Valentinus; contemporary, but older.</note>, and took up and
amplified his doctrine. He likewise made the Creator
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
inferior to the Supreme God, and the author of
evil, fond of war, inconsistent, and self-contradictory;
and taught that Jesus was sent by the
Supreme God to do away all the operations of
the Creator, and especially the Law and the Prophets<note place='foot'>I. xxvii. 2.</note>.
He agreed with other Gnostics in declaring
that the soul alone was capable of salvation, and of
souls only those which received his doctrine; but
the peculiarity of his system was, that Cain, and the
Sodomites, and Egyptians, &amp;c. were saved by believing
in Jesus, when he descended into hell; but
that Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and all the good
men and prophets of the Old Covenant, having often
been deceived by their God, were afraid to trust in
Jesus, and consequently remain still in the state of
death<note place='foot'>Ibid. 3. His opinions concerning Cain became the nucleus
of another sect, the Cainites.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Another peculiarity was that, whilst professing to
receive portions of the New Testament, such as the
Gospel of St. Luke and the Epistles of St. Paul, he
rejected every portion of them which he imagined to
militate against his hypothesis<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2. The writer in the name of Tertullian, as quoted above,
note 5, asserts that he received only some of St. Paul's Epistles.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Marcion, who, having been originally a Christian,
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
and the son of a Bishop, had been excommunicated
for seduction<note place='foot'>Tertull. l. c.</note>, appears to have harmonized with
Saturninus in professing extraordinary strictness of
habits<note place='foot'>I. xxviii. 1.</note>. Hence some of the followers of both formed
themselves into a separate sect, called by a name
(Ἐγκρατεῖς) of which perhaps <hi rend='smallcaps'>Puritans</hi> is the best
English Translation. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tatian</hi>, who had been a sincere
Christian, was formerly a disciple of Justin, and
had written a treatise to set forth the folly of the
heathen religion<note place='foot'>From this treatise, which is still extant, we learn that he
was an Assyrian by birth, had been a heathen, and had been
initiated into most of the heathen mysteries, but had been converted
(a rare instance) by the reading of the Scriptures (§§ 64 &amp;
46). In this treatise he opposes the idea that matter had no
beginning, and declares that it was created by the (personal)
Word of God (§ 8). Perhaps he may be thought to lean to
Gnosticism where he says that the soul is naturally mortal, and
that the unenlightened soul perishes with the body. § 21, 22.</note>, became a leading man amongst
them: for they adopted an opinion of his that Adam
was not saved. Their most distinguishing characteristics
however were, their abstinence from marriage,
and from animal food<note place='foot'>I. xxviii. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Marcion taught that Cain and the Sodomites, &amp;c.
were saved by believing in Jesus<note place='foot'>See above, note 9.</note>. Others went
further, and declared that they were agents of the
Supreme Power, to oppose the God of this world.
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
They likewise took Judas under their patronage, and
declare that he betrayed Jesus, not from treachery
or a love of gain, but because, being better instructed
than the rest, he was aware that the death of Jesus
would be the means of dissolving and breaking up
the whole work of the Creator, whom they regarded
as in rebellion against the Great Original<note place='foot'>I. xxxi. 1.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section V. The Barbeliots, Ophites, And Sethites.</head>

<p>
Those of whom I have hitherto spoken have been
acknowledged disciples, more or less directly, of
Simon Magus. But there were others, who owned
no connexion with him, and yet taught a system
more or less like his. The <hi rend='smallcaps'>Barbeliots</hi>, for instance,
imagined one Supreme Being, and with him another
Being of the female sex, but remaining always a
virgin, and never growing old, whom they call Barbelo,
Ennœa (Thought), &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
They say that he <emph>willed</emph> to manifest himself to her,
and that she, coming into his presence, called for
Foreknowledge, and she came forth. At their
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
request again Incorruption was produced, and then
Life Eternal. After this Barbelo herself produced
a light like to herself, which the Father saw and
anointed with his goodness, and thus made it the
Christ. At his request Understanding was sent him
as a helpmate, and afterwards the Father added the
Word: upon which there were made Pairs, by the
union of Thought and the Word, Incorruption and
the Christ, Life Eternal and the Will of the Father,
Understanding and Foreknowledge; all of whom
magnified the Great Light and Barbelo<note place='foot'>I. xxix. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
From Thought and the Word was then sent forth
the Self-existent and the Truth; from the Christ
and Incorruption, four Lights to attend upon the
Self-existent; and from Will and Life Eternal, four
Beings to wait upon these Lights, namely, Grace,
Will, Comprehension (Σύνεσις), and Prudence.
These were joined respectively to the four Lights,
and made other four Pairs<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2.</note>.
</p>

<p>
These two quaternions being settled, the Self-existent
creates a man, in a state of perfection,
named the Unconquered, and in union with him
Knowledge, likewise perfect. From these were
manifested the Mother, the Father, and the Son,
and they jointly produced the tree of knowledge,
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
and their enjoyment consists in celebrating the
praises of the Great Being<note place='foot'>I. xxix. 3.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, Charis, the attendant upon Harmogenes<note place='foot'>I read <hi rend='italic'>Harmogenes</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>Monogenes</hi>, because the latter name
has not occurred as the name of any of these supposed Beings,
and because Harmogenes is the first of them who is said to have
an <emph>attendant</emph>, which is the idea implied in <hi rend='italic'>Angelos</hi>, the word used
by Irenæus. Massuet suggests <hi rend='italic'>Autogenes</hi>, but gives no reason.</note>,
produces the Holy Spirit, called likewise Wisdom
and Prunicus. She, seeing herself unmated, stretched
herself forth in every direction, and even towards
the nether parts, seeking her mate; and in the effort
brought forth a production in which appeared presumption
and ignorance; which production became
the Prime Governor, and Maker of this world, and
Creator of Powers and Angels, and being paired
with Presumption, he begot malice, and emulation,
and jealousy, and fury, and desire: upon which his
mother, being grieved, departed and left him alone;
whence he imagines that there is none but he, and
utters that sentiment by the mouths of the prophets<note place='foot'>I. xxix. 4.</note>.
</p>

<p>
There was another more intricate and complete
hypothesis, which owned no master, but took its
denomination variously from two different marked
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
portions of it, which will be noticed in their
place<note place='foot'>See pp. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It supposed, like most of its predecessors, an Original,
called the First Light, the Father of all, and
the First Man; and his Thought, issuing from him,
and thence called the Son of Man. Next to them
came the Holy Spirit, the first woman, which
hovered over the elements, water, darkness, the
abyss and chaos. From the Father and Son, impregnating
the Spirit, came the Christ, the third
man<note place='foot'>I. xxx. 1.</note>. By this impregnation, however, she was
filled so superabundantly, that she produced not only
the Christ on the right hand, but also another Being,
imbued likewise with light, called Wisdom and Prunicus,
a hermaphrodite. Upon this the Christ was
united with the first Three, and with them formed
the true holy Church<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2.</note>; whilst Wisdom descended
upon the waters, and moved them to their lowest
depths, and took from them a material body, which
had nearly overpowered her; but making a great
effort, by the aid of the supernal light within her,
she rose aloft, and from her body, by a voluntary
expansion, created the heavens<note place='foot'>Ibid. 3.</note>.
</p>

<p>
She, moreover, had a son, who knew not his
mother, but sent forth from the waters a son of his
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
own, and he another, and so on to the seventh, who,
with their mother formed an ogdoad<note place='foot'>I. xxx. 4.</note>; the first of
whom was named Jaldabaoth, the second Jao, the
third Great Sabaoth, the fourth Adonai, the fifth
Eloeus (or Elohei), the sixth Horeus, the seventh
Astaphæus. All these for some space of time sat harmoniously
in heaven, in due subordination one to the
other: but Jaldabaoth, confident in having been the
author of the others, took upon him to create angels
and archangels, and excellencies, and powers and
dominions; envious at which, his posterity rebelled
against him: upon which he fixed his desires upon
the unformed matter, and from it produced a son
in the form of a serpent, called Understanding,
(from whom these people derived their name of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ophites</hi><note place='foot'>Some of them said that Wisdom herself took the form of a
serpent. § 15.</note>,) and subsequently Spirit, Soul, and all
earthly things, from which sprang forgetfulness,
malice, emulation, jealousy, and death<note place='foot'>I. xxx. 5.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Jaldabaoth, blindly exulting in his success, exclaimed,
<emph>I am Father and God, and besides me there
is no other</emph>; but his mother astonished him and his
posterity, by exclaiming, <emph>Lie not, Jaldabaoth, for there
is above thee the First Man, the Father of all, and
Man the Son of Man</emph>. To call off their attention
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
from this intelligence, he invited them to make man
in their own image. This idea their mother secretly
encouraged, that they might empty themselves of
their celestial virtue. Their production, however,
although immense in size and length, lay sprawling
on the ground, until they brought it to their father,
who, to the great satisfaction of Wisdom, breathed
into it the breath of life, and thereby emptied himself
of his virtue<note place='foot'>In some degree; for he was totally emptied of it by a
different process. See below, p. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>.</note>. This newly-created being, therefore,
was possessed of <emph>understanding</emph> and <emph>desire</emph>, and
deserting his Creators, gave thanks to the First
Man<note place='foot'>I. xxx. 6.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Jaldabaoth upon this being jealous of him, endeavoured
to re-extract the celestial virtue from him,
by creating woman from his desire; but Prunicus,
having invisibly taken charge of her, extracted the
virtue from her, and the posterity of Jaldabaoth,
admiring her beauty, called her Eve, and begot from
her angels. The machinations of Prunicus did not
end here, for she employed Understanding, the son
of Jaldabaoth, who was in the form of a serpent, to
seduce the man and woman into disobedience to the
commands of Jaldabaoth, by eating the forbidden
fruit<note place='foot'>Those who called Wisdom the serpent, say that she inspired
them with knowledge.</note>, by which means they became acquainted with
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
the Supreme Virtue, and forsook their Creators<note place='foot'>I. xxx. 7.</note>.
Upon this they were ejected from paradise, and being
deprived by Prunicus of the divine light they had,
that nothing divine might be subjected to curse, they
were cast out into this world, together with the serpent,
who from the earthly angels begat seven sons,
in imitation of Jaldabaoth and his six descendants.
These with their parent are always opposing the
welfare of the human race<note place='foot'>Ibid. 8.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Before Adam and Eve fell they had bright and
spiritual bodies; but afterwards their bodies became
opaque and heavy, and their souls relaxed and weak;
until Prunicus having pity on them, restored to them
the savour of the heavenly light, by which means
they became aware of their degraded condition.
Knowing, however, that the debasement was only
temporary, they complied with their condition, ate
and drank, and begat Cain and Abel, of whom Cain,
being seized on by the serpent, fell into folly and
presumption, envy and murder. After this, by the
interposition of Prunicus, they begat Seth and Norea,
from whom mankind sprung<note place='foot'>From leaving out Cain as joint progenitor of mankind, and
deriving all the human race from <hi rend='italic'>Seth</hi>, they seem to have been
called <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sethites</hi>.</note>, and were seduced
by the serpent and his children into every evil;
although Prunicus constantly opposed them, and
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
saved the celestial light<note place='foot'>I. xxx. 9.</note>. So likewise when Jaldabaoth,
enraged at not being worshipped by mankind,
sent the flood upon them, Wisdom saved Noah and
his family, for the sake of the tincture of light which
was in them. Abraham, however, and the Jews
were the chosen people of Jaldabaoth, who with his
six descendants chose agents from among them, each
for himself, to glorify him as God<note place='foot'>Ibid. 10.</note>. Moses, therefore,
Joshua, Amos, and Habakkuk, were the prophets
of Jaldabaoth; Samuel, Nathan, Jonah, and
Micah of Jao; Elijah, Joel, and Zachariah of Sabaoth;
Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, and Daniel of
Adonai; Tobias and Haggai of Elohei; Micah and
Nahum of Horeus; Ezra and Zephaniah of Astaphæus<note place='foot'>Ibid. 11.</note>.
</p>

<p>
But here again Wisdom, or Prunicus, interfered,
and turned these prophets into her own instruments,
causing them to speak of the Supreme Being, and
of the Christ above, who was to descend upon earth.
These announcements from the mouth of their own
prophets so alarmed the Princes, the posterity of
Jaldabaoth, that they left her at liberty to cause
him, not knowing what he did, to send forth two
men, one, John the Baptist, the other, Jesus<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>. For
having found no rest below, she had returned in
penitence to her mother, the Holy Spirit, the first
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
woman, and called upon her for help. Whereupon
the Holy Spirit petitioned the Supreme Father that
the Christ might descend to her aid: of which, when
she was aware, she inspired the prophets to speak;
and likewise prepared John to announce his coming,
and Jesus by means of her son Jaldabaoth, the God
of this world, to be his receptacle upon earth<note place='foot'>These were, no doubt, Jaldabaoth and his six descendants,
who (§ 5) are called <emph>heavens</emph>, and are likewise spoken of as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per
ordinem sedentes in cœlo, secundum generationem ipsorum</foreign>.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The Christ therefore descended through the seven
heavens<note place='foot'>I. xxx. 12.</note>, taking upon him the likeness of their
children, and drew out from them their virtue, so
that all the supernal light with which they were
imbued returned to him; and having arrived in this
world united himself to Wisdom, his sister, and in
union with her descended upon Jesus, who thenceforward
begun to work miracles. Upon this Jaldabaoth
and his posterity united to kill him; whereupon
the Christ and Wisdom left him, and returned
to the upper sphere; not however deserting him
altogether; for the Christ sent down upon him a
power by which he rose again, clothed with a spiritual
body<note place='foot'>Ibid. 12, 13.</note>. But after this, although he remained
on earth eighteen months, he wrought no miracle,
(as neither did he before his baptism,) being forsaken
by the Christ and Wisdom. Yet he was in a certain
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
degree inspired, and taught these things to a
few of his disciples<note place='foot'>I. xxx. 14.</note>.
</p>

<p>
At the end of eighteen months he was taken up
into heaven, where the Christ placed him<note place='foot'>I imagine this to be the meaning of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Christo sedente</foreign>; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sedeo</foreign>
being taken in a transitive sense. Ἰδρύομαι was probably the
original word.</note> on the
right hand of his father Jaldabaoth, though without
his knowledge, where his business is to receive the
souls of those who know these doctrines, viz. those
who are imbued with the heavenly light. By this
means Jaldabaoth will by degrees lose the whole of
that which he originally possessed, and be left entirely
earthly and material; whilst the whole of the
light will be withdrawn from the world and its
creators; and then will be the consummation of all
things <note place='foot'>I. xxx. 14.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section VI. Valentinus.</head>

<p>
But none of the Gnostic leaders, excepting perhaps
Marcion, obtained so high a pre-eminence as
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Valentinus</hi>, who drew out a kind of eclectic system,
and thus became the founder of a new school: at
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
least Irenæus represents the matter so completely in
this light, that he classes all the others together by
the general name of Gnostics<note place='foot'>I. xi. 1. bis.</note>, in contradistinction
to Valentinus and his school.
</p>

<p>
Report<note place='foot'>Epiphan. <hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> xxxi. 2.</note> makes him an Ægyptian by birth, and
Tertullian expressly informs us<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv. Valent.</hi> 4.</note> that he was originally
a Christian; and indeed a person of such eminence
in the Church that he aspired to the office of
Bishop. But his mind was tinged with the Platonism<note place='foot'>Tertull. <hi rend='italic'>de Præscr.</hi> 7. 30. Epiphan. Πεπαιδεῦσθαι τὴν τῶν
Ἐλλήνων παιδείαν.</note>
which was so prevalent in Alexandria, the
place of his education: and it did not happen to
him as to Justin and Clement, in whom the truth
moulded their philosophical notions, and clad them
in a Christian garb; for being disappointed in the
object of his ambition, he showed how wisely the
Church had acted in rejecting him, by giving himself
thenceforth, like Arius, to the propagation of
error. As he could not be a bishop, he would be a
father of heresy.
</p>

<p>
He took for his foundation, as it would seem<note place='foot'>This appears from a fragment of his, preserved in a <hi rend='italic'>Dialogue
against the Marcionites</hi>, erroneously ascribed to Origen, (see
Dupin upon Origen,) in which it is quoted at length by one of the
speakers. See the fragment, in the Appendix to the Benedictine
edition of Irenæus, or in Grabe's <hi rend='italic'>Spicilegium</hi>, II. p. 55.</note>, the
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
difficulty of explaining the origin of evil consistently
with holding the perfection of God. He was
thence led to make matter co-eval with the Creator,
and to declare that all the defects of created things
arise from that portion of matter which he left untouched
in the work of creation, as unfit for his use.
This idea he doubtless borrowed from the Platonic
philosophy: but how from this he passed into the
absurdities of Gnosticism we are not informed. We
only learn from Irenæus that he fashioned them into
a new system. It is curious, however, that he is
said by his followers to have derived his notions from
a disciple of St. Paul<note place='foot'>Called <hi rend='italic'>Theodas</hi>, by Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> VII.
17. § 106.</note>, and that he endeavoured to
represent them as perfectly consistent with the
Scriptures<note place='foot'>Tertull. <hi rend='italic'>de Præscr.</hi> 38.</note>. He had attained such a degree of
notoriety before the year 142, in which Justin
Martyr offered his First Apology to Antoninus Pius,
that Justin therein speaks of having written that book
against all the heresies<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> I. 26. See Grabe's <hi rend='italic'>Spicilegium</hi>, II. 44, 45.</note>, to which Tertullian is believed
to refer when he mentions Justin amongst those who
had written against Valentinus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv. Valent.</hi> 5.</note>. And this agrees
with what Irenæus says<note place='foot'>III. iv. 3.</note>, that he came to Rome in
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
the time of Hyginus, flourished under Pius, and
continued to the time of Anicetus. For whether
we take the Chronology of Eusebius<note place='foot'>In his <hi rend='italic'>Canon Chronicus</hi>.</note>, who places
his coming to Rome in the year 141, or third of
Antoninus, or that of Eutychius, favoured by Bishop
Pearson<note place='foot'>Dissert. 2. <hi rend='italic'>de annis primorum Romæ Episcoporum</hi>, cap. 12.</note> who makes Hyginus contemporary with
Adrian, this would equally agree with Justin having
already written against him in 142: for he made
himself known in his own country as an opposer of
the truth before he came to Rome<note place='foot'>Tertull. <hi rend='italic'>adv. Valent.</hi> 4.</note>. Whatever may
be thought of the precise year at which he came to
that city, he remained there fifteen or twenty years,
for he continued to the episcopate of Anicetus, and
retained some character for piety and correctness of
faith up to that period<note place='foot'>Epiphan. <hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> xxxi. 7.</note>. Thenceforward, however,
he cast off all such pretensions, and retiring to Cyprus,
taught without disguise all the impieties his
system naturally led to<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It has so happened that Irenæus did not write
directly against him, but against his followers: and
as every disciple held himself capable of improving
upon the system of his instructor, that which the
Bishop of Lyons gives in full detail differs in some
particulars from that taught by Valentinus himself.
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
It was in fact more nearly that of Ptolemy, his most
noted follower<note place='foot'>I. <hi rend='italic'>Præf.</hi> 2.</note>: but still Ptolemy had some peculiarities
of his own<note place='foot'>I. xii. 1.</note>. Yet Irenæus has preserved
to us the leading features of the scheme as taught
by Valentinus, and by their help, and that of a fragment
preserved by Epiphanius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> xxxi. 5. It is printed in the Appendix to the best
editions of Irenæus.</note>, which corresponds
with what Irenæus has told us, (although Bishop
Pearson rightly contends that it is not the work of
the heretical leader himself). I will endeavour to
place it before my readers.
</p>

<p>
Valentinus then taught, according to Irenæus, that
all things sprung from one primeval pair, the Ineffable
and Silence<note place='foot'>I. xi. 1. The Valentinians against whom Irenæus wrote
made the first pair the First Cause, First Father, or Depth, and
Thought, Grace or Silence. See I. i. 1.&mdash;Ptolemy placed the Depth
first, but gave him two consorts, Thought and Will. See I. xii. 1.</note>: the latter being according to
the fragment the Thought of the former or his
Grace, but called Silence more correctly, because
she accomplished every thing by simple <emph>desire</emph> without
utterance. From these, according to Valentinus,
sprung another pair, the Father<note place='foot'>Called by his followers Mind, Only-begotten, Father or Beginning
of all things.</note> and the Truth: the
former of whom the fragment makes to emanate
from the Unbegotten Original and Silence, by her
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
desire; the latter from herself and the Father, by
some mysterious union of the <emph>lights</emph> from each; so
that their offspring was a <emph>true</emph> image of herself and
thence derived her name. Truth, therefore, by a
like mysterious union with her Father, produces a
tetrad of two pairs, the Word and the Life, Man
and the Church. Subsequently the Holy Spirit was
sent forth either by the Truth or by the Church, (for
upon that point the Old Translator of Irenæus and
Epiphanius differ,) to examine the Æons, and to
make them fruitful in the produce of truth<note place='foot'>I. xi. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
So far Irenæus and the fragment correspond,
excepting that the latter places Man and the Church
first<note place='foot'>As Irenæus tells us some of the Valentinians did.</note>: but from this point there appears nothing
more in common, and as henceforth there is a general
coincidence between Valentinus and his followers,
I shall give the scheme as it appears in the first
book of Irenæus, mentioning the variations where
they occur.
</p>

<p>
It may be however proper to notice this radical
difference between the heresiarch and his disciples,
that he considered all these Æons, as they were
called, or Eternal Essences, as merely feelings, affections,
and motions of the one unseen, infinite
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
First Cause, whereas they regarded them as so many
personal beings<note place='foot'>At least this is the account of Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>adv. Valent.</hi> 4.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The last mentioned tetrad then, knowing themselves
to have been sent forth to the glory of the
unbegotten Father, desired to glorify him by their
own act. Wherefore the Word and the Truth sent
forth ten Æons, called the Profound and Mixture,
the Ever-youthful and Union, the Self-existent and
Pleasure, the Immoveable and Commixture, the
Only-begotten and the Blessed: whilst Man and the
Church sent forth twelve, called the Paraclete and
Faith, the Paternal and Hope, the Maternal and
Charity, Aïnus (the Eternal Mind, or as it is in
the Latin Æons, or Praise) and Comprehension, the
Ecclesiastical and Blessedness, the Desired and
Wisdom<note place='foot'>I. i. 2. The names are Βύθιος, Μίξις, Ἀγήρατος, Ἕνωσις,
Αὐτοφυὴς, Ἡδονὴ, Ἀκίνητος, Σύνκρασις, Μονογενὴς, Μακαρία·
Παράκλητος, Πίστις, Πατρικὸς, Ἐλπὶς, Μητρικὸς, Ἀγάπη, Ἀείνους,
Σύνεσις, Ἐκκλησιαστικὸς, Μακαριότης, Θελητὸς, Σοφία.</note>.
</p>

<p>
These thirty Æons, consisting of twelve, and ten,
and eight, composed what they called the Fulness<note place='foot'>Πλήρωμα, I. i. 3.</note>:
and Valentinus differed from his followers in placing
a barrier between the First Cause and the others<note place='foot'>I. xi. 1.</note>;
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
which probably is to be explained by his saying that
they were not, like him, real beings, but merely
qualities or emanations. Irenæus was probably the
first person who published their names: for the
Valentinians prided themselves on their being a
secret, hidden from all but the initiated. The names,
however, were differently stated by later Valentinians<note place='foot'>See the fragment above quoted.</note>,
and were in all probability altered on set
purpose whenever they became known.
</p>

<p>
Of these thirty, the Only-begotten or Father alone
knew the nature of the Great Father of all: the rest
desired to know their origin, but knew him not: and
although the Only-begotten was desirous of revealing
him to them, Silence restrained him<note place='foot'>I. ii. 1.</note>. A new
state of things, however, arose from the restlessness
of the last of the Æons, namely Wisdom; who,
under the pretext of affection for the unknown First
Parent, but in reality through venturesome curiosity,
reached forth into the fathomless height and depth,
in a state of extreme excitement and anxiety, and
would have been reabsorbed into the original substance,
but for the interposition of a power called the
Barrier, which prevented her farther progress, and
brought her back to herself; but at the same time
kept up a perpetual separation between her and the
Father, to which she originally belonged<note place='foot'>I. ii. 2.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>

<p>
Valentinus then taught that Wisdom, being thus
separated from Theletos, became the mother of the
Christ, producing him from the remembrance of the
better things or superior beings she had left, but
with a kind of shadow attached to him, derived from
her fallen condition; and by that means emptied
herself of her spiritual substance. Whereupon he,
having become possessed of it, cut off from him the
shadow, and returned aloft into the Fulness, leaving
his mother under the shadow he rejected. In this
still more degraded condition, Valentinus makes her
to have produced a son, who became the Creator,
and whom he regards as complete ruler of all things
subordinate to him<note place='foot'>I. xi. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
His followers, however, improved, as they thought,
upon this part of his scheme. They personified the
longing of Wisdom, making it her offspring, comprising
in it all the feelings of admiration and wonder,
of sorrow, and fear, and perplexity, under which
she had laboured<note place='foot'>I. ii. 3.</note>. They represent the Barrier personally,
as sent down at the intercession of the
Word or Only-begotten, and give him the appellations
of the Stake or Cross, the Redeemer, the
Limiter, the Reconciler<note place='foot'>I. ii. 4. Σταυρὸς, Λυτρωτὴς, Καρπιστὴς, Ὁροθέτης, Μεταγωγεύς.</note>. They affirm that by his
agency Wisdom was freed from the consequences
of her vain search after her original, and restored to
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
her spouse and to the Fulness, whilst her longing
was separated from the Fulness<note place='foot'>I. ii. 4.</note>.
</p>

<p>
At this crisis, to prevent another commotion
amongst the Æons, by the will of the Supreme
Father, the Mind or Only-begotten produced another
pair, the Christ and the Holy Spirit; the former of
whom gave them fully to understand that it was
impossible to comprehend the First Cause, but that
what could be comprehended of him was revealed in
the Only-begotten, whom he taught them to contemplate<note place='foot'>Ibid. 5.</note>;
whilst the latter put them all upon an
equality with each other, and made them all,
according to their sex, Minds, Words, Men, and
Christs, or Truths, Lives, Churches, and Spirits. By
this means they were reduced to a state of repose,
and betook themselves to magnify the Great First
Father. In token whereof they all united to produce
one perfect being, Jesus, called also the Saviour, the
Christ, the Word, and the All, together with angels
his attendants<note place='foot'>Ibid. 6. It appears that he was likewise called the Paraclete
or Comforter (I. iv. 5), and Christ (I. iii. 1).</note>.
</p>

<p>
But we must return to the personified Longing of
Wisdom, whom we shall have to know henceforth
under the name of Achamoth<note place='foot'>I. iv. 1.</note>, which is merely a
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
corruption of the Hebrew word for wisdom, חכמות,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Chokmoth</foreign>, or the same word in some kindred dialect,
omitting the aspirate ח. She, it must be remembered,
was separated from the Celestial Fulness by
Ὅρος, the personal Barrier, the Σταυρὸς or Stake.
But the Christ took pity on her, and reaching forth
over the Barrier, (διὰ τοῦ Σταυροῦ ἐπεκταθεὶς, a strange
perversion and accommodation of evangelical expressions
to their system,) gave her a <emph>natural</emph> life, and
left with her a <emph>savour</emph> of immortality, but did not
communicate to her that knowledge, which in their
system is the principle of <emph>spiritual</emph> life. What he
did leave, however, worked its effect. It led her
to seek after him who had deposited it in her, and
being restrained by the Barrier, she sustained various
feelings, sorrow, and fear, and consternation, all
accompanied by ignorance of all above her, and a
perpetual turning towards him who had given her
life, and pleasure in thinking of the glimpse of light
which had been permitted to her<note place='foot'>I. iv. 1.</note>. From the
tumult within her sprung various productions; being
however in the whole, the Creator of the world and
all created things, of which we shall see more hereafter<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2.</note>.
</p>

<p>
She had scarcely recovered from this state of
perturbation, when the Christ sent down to her the
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
Paraclete; not the offspring of Man and the Church,
but that perfect being produced by the Æons conjointly,
called likewise the Saviour<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>, note 5.</note>, having power
given him over all things below, and accompanied
by his angels. He separated her from all the products
of her perturbation, and endued her with that
knowledge which before she possessed not. He
likewise separated her productions definitely into
two species of substance, one radically bad, the other
capable of being either good or evil; the one material,
the other animate; to which she speedily added
another, spiritual in its nature, conceived from joyful
contemplation of the angel-attendants of the
Saviour<note place='foot'>I. iv. 5. v. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
From this period she begins to be herself an active
fashioner of her productions. With the <emph>spiritual</emph>
seed she could not meddle, because it was equal to
herself: but from the <emph>animate</emph><note place='foot'>The term Irenæus uses (I. v. 1.) is ψυχικός. Its meaning is
not easy to express by another word. Valentinus, like the Platonists
and several of the early Christian writers, believed in three
kinds of substance, πνευματικὴ, ψυχικὴ, σωματικὴ, analogous to the
three parts of man, spirit, soul, and body; the first of which he
conceived to be naturally and necessarily immortal, the third
necessarily perishable, the second capable of either immortality
or destruction, but having a kind of life, as long as it existed,
which the third had not.</note> substance she first
formed the actual Creator of all earthly things, called
likewise God the Father, the Saviour, the King of
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
all, the Mother's Father, the Fatherless<note place='foot'>I. v. 1.</note>. By him
she, or rather the Saviour through her, fashioned all
things here below, from the two substances, animate
and material: first the seven heavens, who are also
seven angels<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2.</note>, then the earth and man<note place='foot'>Valentinus himself appears to have made man the joint work
of the Creator and the other Angels. See a fragment of one of
his letters, preserved by Clem. Alex. <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> II. 8. § 36.</note>, and all the
elements and creatures, and lastly the spirits of wickedness,
of whom the prince of this world was the
chief<note place='foot'>I. v. 3, 4.</note>. Of these man was a compound of the animate
and the material<note place='foot'>Ibid. 5.</note>. All these the Creator made, not
knowing what he did; and so his mother Achamoth,
without his knowledge, infused into the man which
he had made, that spiritual seed of which I have
before spoken<note place='foot'>This was recognised by Valentinus in the fragment above
cited.</note>, which is the Church, (or rather the
Calling, ἐκκλησία,) an image of the Ecclesia above<note place='foot'>I. v. 6.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It is not however to be supposed that all men
have a share of this seed of election. It is only
partially possessed. Those who have it not may be
saved by faith and good works, those who have it are
necessarily saved, and are incapable of being corrupted
by any action or course of life. To the former
class belong Churchmen, (Christians) to the latter
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
Gnostics<note place='foot'>I. vi. 1, 2.</note>. The natural consequences followed, such
as I have detailed before, with more or less of disguise,
according to the character or circumstances of
the professors of such doctrines. Some did openly
whatever they felt inclined to, others went more
warily to work: but the result every where was the
same, the free indulgence of the sensual passions,
with all their lamentable consequences; and those
so much the more fatal, as they were accompanied
by a profession of superior knowledge and purity<note place='foot'>Ibid. 3.</note>.
</p>

<p>
We have mentioned one Jesus already: but they
likewise professed to believe in the Jesus of the
Gospel. They taught that the Creator produced a
son, unspiritual like himself, and that he was sent
into the world by the Virgin Mary, as a mere vehicle,
such as a water-pipe is to water; that he was<note place='foot'>Tertull. <hi rend='italic'>de Resur. Carnis</hi>, 2, states this as the opinion of
Valentinus, and <hi rend='italic'>de Carne Christi</hi>, 15. In the fragment, (Clem.
Alex. <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> III. 7. § 59,) Valentinus says that Jesus attained
to divinity by his purity; which was such that his food did not
corrupt within him.</note>
clad in a body different from that of others; that
when he was baptized, the Jesus before mentioned
descended upon him in the form of a dove; and that
he was likewise impregnated by Achamoth with the
spiritual seed. Of these four portions of his nature
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
only the two former suffered; the Saviour having
quitted him when he was delivered up to Pilate<note place='foot'>I. vii. 2.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The winding up of this state of things is to take
place when all the spiritual seed has become perfect
in knowledge. Then Achamoth and the spiritual
portion of every Gnostic will be elevated into
the Fulness: the Creator, the animal souls of the
Gnostics, with the souls of those who have been
saved by faith and good works, will be raised to the
intermediate heaven; and then the hidden fire will
burst forth from this lower world and consume those
souls which have not attained to salvation together
with all material things, and with them will be
reduced to nothing<note place='foot'>Ibid. 1.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The most remarkable feature in the scheme of
Valentinus was his treatment of the Scriptures. He
did not, like some of his predecessors, speak with
contempt of them, as having proceeded from an imperfect
Being. He did not like others reject the
whole New Testament, as a figment of the <q>natural
men,</q> as they called the orthodox, and substitute
apocryphal writings in their place: nor did he again,
like others, reject such portions of the Scriptures as
militated strongly against their views. He professed
to receive the whole of the Gospels and Apostolical
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
writings, but he accommodated the Scripture to his
views. Tertullian indeed<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Præscr.</hi> 38.</note> uses very different terms;
viz. that he did not accommodate the Scripture to
his views, but his views to the Scripture. It was
certainly his endeavour to <emph>appear</emph> so to do; and
accordingly he adopted Scripture <emph>language</emph> to a very
great extent, and no doubt professed, like all modern
teachers of false doctrine, to find all his doctrine in
the Scripture: so that I believe we have only one
instance of his reading a passage differently from
the Church<note place='foot'>Matt. xi. 27. See IV. vi. 1. But his followers preferred
the Gospel of St. John (III. xi. 7), and some of them forged what
they called the <hi rend='italic'>Gospel of the Truth</hi>. Ibid. 9.</note>. Indeed he reproached the orthodox
for not having preserved the true meaning: or rather
looked down upon them as being naturally incapable
of receiving it; being not spiritual, but natural and
carnal.
</p>

<p>
It was, no doubt, in this way that he kept up that
character for faith and piety, of which Epiphanius
speaks, and to which Tertullian alludes<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Præscr.</hi> 30.</note>. Irenæus
has given us numerous instances in which he and
his followers quoted the Scriptures as supporting
their own doctrine<note place='foot'>I. i. 3. iii. viii.</note>: but they will be found to be
either forced accommodations of numbers and names,
or violent perversions of the letter of Scripture, or
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
mystical interpretations put upon it in such a way as
that it may almost be made to mean anything. The
success of such interpretations was of course aided
by the equally unnatural accommodations of Scripture
customary with the orthodox, at least those of
the Alexandrian school. There are, likewise, some
fragments of his preserved by Clement of Alexandria<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> II. 8. § 36. 20. § 114. III. 7. § 59. IV. 13. § 91.
VI. 6. § 52.</note>,
which have the same tone as the system generally;
but one of these<note place='foot'>Ibid. II. 20. § 114.</note>, in which he compares the
heart occupied by divers evil passions to an inn or
caravanserai defiled by travellers, appears at first
sight so unobjectionable, that, out of the connection
in which it stands, one should hardly suspect any
evil meaning. It is however intended to teach the
Gnostic tenet, that the heart of the spiritual man is
no more a partaker of the evil wrought in it by evil
spirits, than a caravanserai in the nuisances committed
by every wanton traveller. This is evidently
another, and a less offensive way of stating that to
the spiritual mind no passion can communicate any
permanent pollution, and that the elect are not to
be called to account for what they fall into in this
world: and its inoffensiveness at first sight is no bad
illustration of the habit Irenæus charges them with
of teaching their heresies by stealth<note place='foot'>I. Præf. 2.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section VII. Secundus, Epiphanes, Ptolemy, Colorbasus, And Marcus.</head>

<p>
Irenæus mentions several successors of Valentinus,
some more at length than others.
</p>

<p>
Respecting <hi rend='smallcaps'>Secundus</hi>, who was the contemporary
and disciple of Valentinus<note place='foot'>Epiphan. <hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> xxxi. 1.</note>, he is very brief, merely
informing us that he divided the first ogdoad into
two tetrads, the right and the left, which he denominated
<emph>light</emph> and <emph>darkness</emph>: and that he asserted
that the Being which erred and was forsaken by the
upper powers was not one of the thirty, but one of
their productions<note place='foot'>I. xi. 2.</note>. The latter idea would appear
to have for its object to remove the origin of evil
further from the First Cause: but the former seems
to be a contradiction to it, as it brings darkness into
the Pleroma.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Epiphanes</hi>, whose name the old translator has
chosen to render by <hi rend='italic'>Clarus</hi>, (probably not understanding
it to be a proper name,) was the son of
Carpocrates<note place='foot'>Clem. Alex. <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> III. ii. § 5.</note>, but attached himself to the followers
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
of Secundus<note place='foot'>See Massuet, <hi rend='italic'>Diss. Præv.</hi> I. § 80.</note>. He died very young, being according
to Clem. Alex. only seventeen at the time of
his death, and was honoured as a god by the people
of Cephalonia, the birth-place of his mother and his
own place of residence. He is identified with the
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Clarus</hi> of the old translator of Irenæus; 1. because
he is commonly reckoned next to Secundus<note place='foot'>Epiphan. xxxi. 1. xxxii. 3. Theodoret. <hi rend='italic'>Hær. Fab.</hi> I. 5.</note>; 2.
because <hi rend='italic'>Clarus</hi> is a literal rendering of Ἐπιφανής;
3. because the doctrines ascribed to Epiphanes are
the same as those which are attributed in Irenæus
to Clarus<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>. He differed from his predecessors in
not giving any <emph>name</emph> (properly speaking) to the First
Cause, but in calling him Μονότης, and his companion
Ἐνότης, which may perhaps be rendered Soleness
and Unity. These, he said, constituted only one
being. This duopersonal Being produced, without
separation from himself, a beginning of all things,
comprehensible, but unbegotten and invisible, called
the Monad, and with him another power denominated
the One. This was his first tetrad; but in
the rest he does not appear to have differed from the
other Valentinians<note place='foot'>I. xi. 3.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ptolemy</hi> was a Valentinian, and is said to have
been a disciple of Secundus and Epiphanes. It
would appear from Irenæus that the system which
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
he states at length, and which I have detailed above,
was his actual system<note place='foot'>I. Præf. 2. viii. 5.</note>. Epiphanius indeed, quoting
Irenæus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> xxxiii. 1. Ὁ Πτολεμαῖος καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ. The passage
he quotes is I. xii. 1.</note>, makes him say that this heretic and his
disciples ascribed two wives to Bythus, Thought and
Will, from whom he made the rest of the Æons to
proceed. But it is evident from the version of the
Ancient Interpreter that the actual words of Irenæus
were Οἱ περὶ Πτολεμαῦον, which may mean either
Ptolemy or his followers, and as Tertullian ascribes
this tenet to his disciples, desirous of improving upon
their master, we may safely conclude that Epiphanius
does not intend to attribute it distinctly to Ptolemy,
but either to him or to his followers.
</p>

<p>
Of the followers of Ptolemy, Irenæus mentions
the tenets of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Colorbasus</hi> particularly. He does not
indeed name him, but Epiphanes<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hær.</hi> xxxv. 1.</note> and Theodoret<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hær. Fab.</hi> I. 12.</note>
have supplied that defect, nor is there any contradictory
statement on the subject. He taught that
the first ogdoad of Æons did not spring successively
one pair from another, but that the first four after
the First Cause and his Thought were created at
once when the Forefather determined upon giving
forth some being, that became the Father; as what
he emitted was true, it was called the Truth: when
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
he wished to manifest himself, then came Man; and
those whom he then foresaw were the Church. Then
Man spoke the Word, and from Man and the Church
came Life<note place='foot'>I. xii. 3.</note>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Marcus</hi> is mentioned by Irenæus apparently as a
disciple of Ptolemy, or at least as having made his
system after him<note place='foot'>I. xiii. 1. Magistri emendatorem se esse glorians.</note>: and as Tertullian<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv. Valent.</hi> 4.</note> speaks of him
in the same terms, we may safely take that as the
sense of Irenæus. We find him first in Asia Minor,
recompensing the hospitality of a deacon with whom
he lodged by corrupting his wife, who for a good
while followed him, but was at length brought back
to the Church by the perseverance of the Christians<note place='foot'>I. xiii. 5. See p. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, note 9.</note>.
Where his subsequent residence was we do not learn.
The circumstance which brought him more particularly
under the notice of Irenæus was that his opinions
and the consequent depravity of morals had
spread to the neighbourhood of Lyons<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>. The practical
mischief appears first to have attracted his
attention, and he was thence led to inquire into the
speculative system which produced such fruits. Both
the one and the other shall be noticed in their order.
</p>

<p>
The scheme differed in reality very little in its
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
frame-work from that of Valentinus, Ptolemy, and
Colorbasus; the latter of whom Irenæus represents
him as more particularly agreeing with<note place='foot'>I. xiv. 1.</note>; but it was
differently dressed up. Instead of making the Fulness
a system of personal beings or emanations, he
made it the <emph>name</emph> of the Great First Cause, consisting
of thirty letters, instead of as many Æons, divided
into four syllables, of which the two first consisted
of four letters each, the third of ten, and the
fourth of twelve. This name originated in the wish
of the Great Father to reveal himself. He therefore
opened his mouth, and spoke a Word like himself,
which was Ἀρχὴ, the Beginning; (this was the
first syllable;) then a second, a third, and a fourth.
What the three latter are we are not told: but they
have continued to sound on from that day to the
present, and will continue so to do, until they all
unite in sounding forth together the same letter,
when the consummation of all things will take place.
About this matter, however, there is some obscurity,
the passage not being very intelligible<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>.
</p>

<p>
It would be tedious beyond measure to enter into
the application of this particular notion to the general
Gnostic scheme: but he held a particular doctrine
in regard to Jesus, which it will be proper to
mention. He thought that he was the joint production
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
of Man and the Church, the Word and Life;
but that in producing him the angel Gabriel took
the place of the Word, the Holy Spirit of Life, the
Power of the Most High of Man, and the Virgin
Mary of the Church: that the Supreme Father
chose him in the womb to manifest himself in him
by means of the Word, who therefore descended
upon him at his baptism in the form of a dove<note place='foot'>I. xv. 3.</note>.
</p>

<p>
I come now to the <emph>practice</emph> of Marcus. He openly
pretended supernatural powers, communicated to
him by a familiar spirit, which he flattered his followers,
chiefly women, by professing to communicate
to them<note place='foot'>I. xiii. 3.</note>. The Eucharist he found especially suited
to his purpose, and was the first apparently who
taught any thing like transubstantiation. He used,
like the Church, wine mingled with water, but pretended
to bring down into it by his prayers, the
blood of the supernal Grace; and accordingly,
lengthening out his devotion, that the chemical
agents, which he doubtless employed, might have
time to act, he at length produced the liquid, of a
much deeper colour than when he began his incantations.
In another of his tricks he gave his female
friends a part. He requested one of them to take
the mingled cup, and to offer the prayer of benediction;
whereupon he poured the contents of it
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
into a much larger cup, which he himself held,
which, as he pronounced the mystical blessing upon
the woman he employed, gradually became full with
the contents of the smaller, and at length overflowed<note place='foot'>I. xiii. 2.</note>.
This again was, in all probability, effected
by some chemical agent, deposited in the bottom of
the larger cup, and producing a gradual effervescence:
but in those days of ignorance it stamped
the worker of such wonders as something more
than ordinary man.
</p>

<p>
In communicating, as he pretended, to his devotees
a portion of the grace he possessed, he purposely
contrived, in the most subtle manner, to
inflame their sensual desires, and to direct them towards
himself, without using a single word or act to
which he could not immediately give a mystical
meaning; so that, if his wishes did not succeed,
there was nothing with which he could be charged,
without subjecting the person who so charged him
to the imputation of having put an unholy meaning
upon holy things. And if they did succeed, the
victim, if not conscience-seared, would feel self-corrupted
and self-betrayed. In this way he became
master, not only of the persons, but also of the substance
of many women of wealth and station<note place='foot'>Ibid. 3.</note>. To
make his arts, however, the more successful, he administered
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
to them inflammatory drugs<note place='foot'>I. xiii. 5. See p. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, note 9.</note>: and still
more to guard himself from their defection, under
the terror of conscience, and the dread of future
judgment, he taught them a form of words, to be
addressed to their mother Achamoth, whom he
represents as seated with God on his throne, by
means of which they would be rendered invisible to
the Judge, and pass unhurt to their heavenly spouses
the angels<note place='foot'>Ibid. 6.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Such a scheme as this was too palatable to human
nature not to have many followers; and accordingly
it found its way to Lyons, where Irenæus was bishop.
The exact nature of it was first learnt by the confessions
of his victims and those of his followers,
when, recovering from their delusion, they wished
to be readmitted to the Church. One particular
instance I have already mentioned, of his having
seduced the wife of a deacon in Asia Minor, with
whom he had lodged. This person remained with
him for a long time; but, being at length restored
by the unwearied efforts of the Christians, spent the
rest of her life bewailing the pollution she had sustained.
This was not the only instance of repentance;
but most appear to have dreaded the public
acknowledgment which was then required in the
case of gross transgression, and thus never to have
returned<note place='foot'>Ibid. 5. 7.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section VIII. Gnostic Redemption.</head>

<p>
There is one feature of the Gnostic scheme common
to almost every variety of the Gnostics, which
was reserved for a separate detail; and which Irenæus
introduces immediately after the account of the
Marcosian heresy, having probably been able to
obtain a more perfect account of their views on that
subject, than of those of any other sect. That
feature is their ordinance of <hi rend='italic'>Redemption</hi><note place='foot'>I. xxi. 1.</note>; which was
in fact the initiating rite of their perfect adepts<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2.</note>,
and without denying baptism, threw it into the
back ground, and thus virtually annulled it<note place='foot'>Ibid. 1.</note>. The
professed object of this rite was the regeneration of
those who underwent it, preparatory to their entering
into the Fulness<note place='foot'>Ibid. 2.</note>. The outward form of it was
various, according to the fancy of the mystagogue<note place='foot'>Ibid. 1.</note>.
Some celebrated it as a marriage; others made it a
baptism in water, with varying forms of words<note place='foot'>Ibid. 3.</note>;
others again poured a mixture of oil and water upon
the head of the person who received it; whilst some
declared, that the blessing being purely spiritual, all
outward signs were unavailing and impertinent; that
knowledge was in fact redemption, and that those,
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
and those alone, who were perfect in knowledge
were partakers of it<note place='foot'>I. xxi. 4.</note>.
</p>

<p>
In most cases the Redemption was effected during
the lifetime of those who were made partakers of
it; but the dead were not excluded. The rite was
administered immediately after death.
</p>

<p>
In all cases the effect of it was to enable the
initiated to escape the power of the Creator and his
angels, and, leaving their souls behind them, to enter
into the Fulness<note place='foot'>Ibid. 5.</note>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section IX. Reflections Upon Gnosticism.</head>

<p>
Gnosticism is now well-nigh forgotten, or noticed
only by those who are led to an acquaintance with it
either by its connexion with certain passages in the
New Testament, or by a systematic study of the
early Fathers of the Church. And yet it existed in
the world, and spread over the civilized portions of
it as a system of philosophy at a time when heathen
speculation had attained its highest refinement, and
Christianity had introduced certainty to take the
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
place of speculation. But that it should have taken
hold on the minds of men to such an extent and at
such a time, is surely one of the most unaccountable
facts in the history of the human mind. To us,
even the Platonic system would appear so much
more rational and intelligible, and the Christian doctrine
so much more simple and natural, and, if I
may so say, manly, that in their presence one wonders
what there could have been to recommend
Gnosticism. The Grecian schemes were so many
efforts of unassisted reason to find out truth by
simple speculation. They could therefore never be
propounded as certainties, but only as probabilities.
They accordingly rested on their probability, and
struck out many truths. They bear about them the
air of the conclusions of men searching after truth,
and having in some degree attained it. Christianity,
on the other hand, professed to be a revelation from
above. It did not pretend to speculate or to reason;
it taught its doctrines as infallible truths, and supported
its teaching by miracles, and an appeal to
fulfilled prophecy. Gnosticism was like neither. It
was in fact gratuitous speculation, founded upon
nothing but the fact of a great difficulty, which
human reason had never yet solved, the causation of
evil; but it claimed no support from reason; it propounded
no proofs; but put itself forward as the
revealed solution of this difficulty. It wrought miracles,
indeed, which might have served where the
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
Christian miracles were unknown, but poor and weak
indeed to put in competition with them, for they
were mere juggles. They answered no beneficial
end; they were over in a few minutes; they submitted
themselves to no daily and hourly proof; and
although professing to support a higher and purer
God than was ever before thought of, they were of
the same nature as those practised by heathen sorcerers.
But to have solved this great difficulty, the
system ought at least to have been uniform, or at
most progressive. No teacher should have contradicted
another, however much he might improve
upon him. And yet this was far from being the
case. The various successive teachers not only pulled
down what their predecessors had set up, but even
contemporary leaders contradicted each other. This
would have been perfectly consistent if they had set
up as mere speculators; but they claimed a sort of
inspiration; nay, whilst setting aside the Gospel, they
claimed support from the Gospel; whilst making
higher pretensions than they allowed the Apostles,
they professed to have a tradition received from the
Apostles; whilst utterly overthrowing the religion of
Christ, they appealed to his words and teaching as
supporting them.
</p>

<p>
But although borrowing support from Christianity,
it was not itself in any sense a religion. It taught
no present devotion towards any superior being. It
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
had no offerings, no prayers, still less any expiations.
Although some of its teachers practised rites borrowed
from the eucharist, they had no religious object.
They were mere juggles. Although the <emph>idea</emph>
of glorifying the beings above entered into the system,
yet it affected only the beings above man, or
man after he quitted this state. It had no place on
earth. This was a place of discipline, or training, for
a state in which he was to glorify the great First
Cause; but he had nothing to do with glorifying him
here. The great object of man here was <emph>knowledge</emph>.
In this respect it was analogous to the Grecian philosophies;
for they had no connection with religion,
but were rather antagonists to it. They tended to
overthrow the heathen superstitions, but they furnished
nothing to replace them. They taught, it
may be, moral duties; but it was not upon any principles
of religion, but rather of social benefit. They
attained to better notions on the unity and nature of
God than were entertained by their compatriots, but
they led not to a purer worship of him. At best
they refined and mysticized the mythology and religious
observances of the old religions. In this respect,
then, of being unconnected with religion, it
was like the philosophical systems of its own and
former times; but it went further than they in being
essentially <emph>irreligious</emph>, by placing the perfection of
man in <emph>knowledge</emph>, and that only. By this means the
necessity of religion of any kind was totally done
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
away. Curiosity was substituted for devotion, and
unbounded liberty for duty, whether to God or to
man.
</p>

<p>
Curiosity being thus canonized, it is remarkable
that the Gnostic system had baits for almost every
description of it. It is curiosity, the desire of knowing
what others know, fully as much as passion and
appetite, which leads men into the various descriptions
of vice; and this species of curiosity was not
only allowed, but even sanctioned and stimulated.
Men were told that it was the express destiny of
every one who was to be perfect, to know everything
that could be known in this world; and not only
that, but that if a person failed of acquiring the
requisite knowledge in one lifetime, his soul must
pass into another and another body, until it had
arrived at the necessary degree of information. It
is true that this implied, in its literal meaning, the
knowledge of good as well as of evil. But it requires
little acquaintance with human nature to tell us in
what sense it would be most commonly taken. And
if any scruples still remained, they were removed by
the doctrine that all actions were naturally indifferent,
and that nothing but human opinion, or the
arbitrary will of a tyrannical being, the Jewish God,
had ever made any such thing as moral distinctions.
Thus a vicious curiosity became a <emph>duty</emph>, if such a
term had been allowable in Gnosticism; or, at all
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
events, that man who did not foster and indulge it
to the utmost, was fighting against his own interest.
</p>

<p>
There is another kind of curiosity, which has governed
many in all ages, and which is not even yet
extinct, and that is, a desire to be acquainted with
future or unknown circumstances, or to possess a
power beyond the reach of ordinary men. There
have been always those who have professed themselves
possessors of this supernatural knowledge, and
of course others who have desired either to possess it
or to witness and profit by its exercise. From this
desire has arisen the whole of magic from the beginning,
and the science of astrology in particular. Accordingly,
this was a marked feature in many of the
Gnostic teachers, that they laid claim to magical
powers; and herein they differed from the heathen
philosophers, and became the antagonists of the
Christian apostles. Simon Magus, for instance, who
is generally reckoned the first Gnostic leader, was a
magician, and there is great reason to suspect that
his faith was more a reliance on the Apostles, on the
supposition of their having some deeper art than his
own, than the faith of the heart in the principles of
the Gospel.
</p>

<p>
But there is another class of persons who could
neither be imposed on by the pretensions to supernatural
power, nor the seductions of evil appetites,
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
whose cast of character is altogether intellectual, and
whose temptations must therefore be intellectual.
The attention of such persons had in all ages been
directed to the unseen things of creation, the invisible
springs of all earthly motions and actions, the
secret agencies of nature, the nature of the Great
Original of all things, the methods of his providential
government, the time and manner of the creation,
the origin of evil, the future state of mankind after
their departure from this earthly scene. Questions
of this kind had engaged the curiosity of minds of
the higher order ever since civilization began, and no
system could find acceptance with them which offered
no solution of such questions. Gnosticism accordingly
furnished food for the curiosity of these, and
that in greater abundance than any other system yet
invented.
</p>

<p>
Besides the Gentile speculatists, there was also
the philosophical Jew, who had become acquainted
with the Grecian learning, and had thus come to
endeavour to account, upon new principles, for the
economy of the divine government under the law;
partly for his own satisfaction, partly to render it
palatable to his heathen friends. Two points in his
law would present difficulty: first, the endless forms
and ceremonies considered with reference to God,
who, being a spirit, would require a spiritual worship,
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
(for this is a truth which this class of Jews were
fully sensible of,) together with the prohibitions of
various animals; and secondly, the severities which
God himself exercised and taught their forefathers to
exercise against idolaters. And no doubt many Jews
of this class were become practically unbelievers by
speculating upon points which their forefathers implicitly
received and devoutly practised.
</p>

<p>
There was again another class; viz. Christians by
birth and education, brought up in leisure, and given
to study, who, never having received the Gospel
humbly and practically, became infected with the
unsettled spirit of speculative inquiry. These would
see the apparent incongruities between the law and
the Gospel, especially in the spirit in which each
was administered; and instead of being contented to
be ignorant of that which had not been revealed,
would endeavour to form some system independent
of revelation, by which to account for these incongruities.
To these two classes we shall see that
Gnosticism also adapted itself; and indeed to the
latter it would be specially adapted in the licentiousness
of its morals. For being brought up without
their own choice in a system of great strictness,
at which their nature perhaps rebelled, and which
they had themselves never heartily embraced; and
yet not liking to renounce it on the distinct avowal
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
of a love of vice, they would gladly close with a
scheme which gave unbounded license the character
of superior wisdom, and even of duty itself.
</p>

<p>
We see then what there was in the character of
the times to prepare men for such a system as Gnosticism.
But it did not grow up at once into all its
completeness. It developed itself by degrees, as men
were prepared for it; and when we have considered
it in its leading features, we can scarcely fail to
acquiesce in the view of it taken by the Christian
writers contemporary with it; viz. that it was a
scheme specially concocted by the author of evil, as
antagonist to Christianity.
</p>

<p>
Simon Magus, as all agree, was the first teacher of
Gnosticism; and when he first appeared in that character
in Samaria, it is obvious that he could have
known but little of the Gospel, and this may account
for the little notice taken of it in his system.
He came as the great power of God, that is, as God
manifested on earth; and he wrought pretended
miracles in confirmation of his pretensions. It is
remarkable that none of his successors made any
such pretension as this, although they too, at least
some of them, professed miraculous power. He was
therefore the antagonist of Christ; strictly <emph>Antichrist</emph>,
in a higher sense than any other. He taught that
the God of the Jews was not truly God, but only,
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
like the Jupiter of heathenism, one of a set of angelic
powers; that the Supreme God had nothing to do
with the origination of evil further than that he had
created those angelic powers from whom it had
sprung; nay, that he had not created them directly,
but by his <emph>thought</emph>, which, taking a personal character,
was the actual Creator of these; that therefore
the Supreme Being had nothing to do with anything
in this world, excepting in so far as he had interfered
to remedy the mischief occasioned by the
angels. It was in this way that he endeavoured to
reconcile the imperfections of this world with the
perfection of God. But he went further than this;
for by making the Creator of this world and the
God of the Old Testament an imperfect being, he in
reality denied God, whilst professing to know more
of him than other men.
</p>

<p>
This part of the system only accounted for physical
evil, and such moral evils as oppression and
violence: but moral evil, as we commonly understand
it, he treated in quite a different way; i. e. by
denying that it was evil at all; for he asserted that
it was so only through the tyrannical imposition of
the angels. Nay, he even went so far as to assert
that he himself was God, come down from above to
rescue men from their thraldom by teaching them
the truth of things; and thus to restore them to their
rightful liberty, by showing them that they might
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
do whatever they listed, and indeed ought to do so to
vindicate his authority, which had been usurped by
the angels. A more plausible scheme of blasphemy
and licentiousness could scarcely have been concocted
for the philosophizing Jew, or the heathen who had
looked into Judaism merely as a rival system of barbarian
philosophy. It recognised all the facts of the
Old Testament; but it totally neutralized them, and
destroyed altogether the religion with which they
would have appeared to be inseparably blended.
</p>

<p>
When Christianity began to spread, and Jesus was
believed on by multitudes, and reverenced by many
who did not receive him, it became politic to recognise
the Gospel in the same manner in which the
Law had been recognised. Accordingly, the external
facts of the life of Jesus were not disputed, but a
new spirit was given to them. Jesus was a manifestation
of the Supreme God, as Simon was; come
upon the same errand, to destroy the Jewish law;
and thence an object of hatred to the Jews, who
triumphed so far as to crucify the external body in
which he appeared, but had no power over him who
had inhabited it. Here there was just enough of
truth to impose upon a person brought up to believe
the Gospel without really loving it, and falsehood
enough altogether to prevent its reception.
</p>

<p>
The sketch which I have now traced is the nucleus
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
of Gnosticism. Simon's dignifying his paramour
with the title of the Thought of the First
Cause, and his figment of her having been in a perpetual
state of transmigration, was no doubt an after
thought to cover the grossness which prying minds
might fancy in the great empiric; an end which might
not be sufficiently accomplished by his doctrine that
all actions were indifferent.
</p>

<p>
Whether Simon really invented the first ogdoad
of pure emanations from the Great Father may be
doubted; for the testimony to that fact does not
appear sufficiently early, and those who assert it contradict
each other in the names of them. But that
he taught that there were Excellences and Powers,
as well as angels, appears from Irenæus. Yet as
that author undertakes to tell the share which Simon
had in forming the system, and certainly attributes
the regularity of it to his successors, it appears most
probable that he defined nothing as to the number
or functions of those celestial beings.
</p>

<p>
The sketch, however, of Simon, to whatever extent
he went, was sufficiently filled up by his successors.
In his system of angelic beings they defined
their number, and to a certain extent fixed their
functions. There was at last a body of these
formed between the Supreme Being and the authors
of this world, perfect in holiness and obedience.
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
The defection of one of these was made as much as
possible the work of accident. She was made,
according to various schemes, sometimes to be totally
excluded from this perfect society, sometimes to be
restored to it again, leaving an imperfect offspring
behind her. From her or her offspring, sprang the
Creator, who is sometimes represented as the chief
of seven angels, sometimes as a peculiar being
having the angels under him. The creation of man
is represented as the work of this imperfect being,
but the spark of heavenly life in him as an emanation,
more or less direct, from the First Cause. In
this way the scheme became more definite; but
from the same cause it became a set of schemes
more or less inconsistent with each other, but all
aiming at having a succession of mysteries to be
communicated by degrees. In this way the minds
of men were amused and tantalized, and prevented
from a serious search after truth; whilst if one
scheme was searched to the bottom, and its stock of
mysteries exhausted, there was still another and
another refinement to lure him away from the real
truth. There was, however, the uniform tendency
to remove the government of this world from the
cognizance of the Supreme Being, and to represent
the author of the law and the prophets as an imperfect,
self-contradictory, cruel being. There was the
same mode of rendering null the distinction between
moral good and evil, by attributing it to opinion, or
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
custom, or the ordinance of the God of this world.
There was the same attempt to nullify the Gospel,
by doing away with the Christian idea of the incarnate
Son of God, and representing the advent of
Jesus as a portion of the Gnostic scheme. For whether
Jesus was considered as only <emph>apparently</emph> a man,
or as <emph>merely</emph> a man; whether the Saviour dwelt in
him or made use of him; whether it were the Saviour,
or the Christ, or the Only-begotten, or the Jesus
above, who interested himself for the redemption of
the spiritual seed, it all amounted to the same thing
in the end. It abolished the real salvation of the
soul; it took away the incarnation and atonement;
it made the Gospel of no effect.
</p>

<p>
The nature of the <emph>redemption</emph> it preached was likewise
everywhere the same. It was not a redemption
from the dominion of sin, but by denying that there
was any such thing as sin. Whether it taught that
the simple practical knowledge of this fact was all
the redemption necessary, or that some initiatory
rite was requisite to give that knowledge, or that a
full knowledge of the Gnostic theory was to be
superadded to qualify for <emph>eternal</emph> redemption,&mdash;whether
it led its votaries to defy the God of the Old
Testament, or taught them mystic forms by which
to elude him when sitting in judgment, it all
amounted to the same thing. Lewdness of the
grossest kind was denied to be any sin. There were,
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
indeed, some who embraced the general theory, and
with it believed that the flesh, as being the work of
the Creator, was to be denied and mortified in every
way, and who therefore decried marriage<note place='foot'>Irenæus (I. xxviii. 1) expressly says that they thought marriage
to be pollution and whoredom, and (xxiv. 2) that it and
its natural consequences were from Satan.</note> itself, and
forbad to eat flesh; but they were the few. The
opposite use of the undervaluing of the flesh was
the more popular and the more prevalent.
</p>

<p>
Hitherto, perhaps, there has appeared but little in
common with our own times; but there were other
features of Gnosticism, in which it will appear to
have been the parent of Antinomianism, even that
of the most recent days. If any one is at all familiar
with the high Calvinism of Toplady and his school,
he will have found that it strongly resembled the
Gnosticism of the age of Irenæus. It is of the
essence of strict Calvinism to teach that <emph>individuals</emph>
are <emph>inevitably</emph> destined to salvation; and so it was in
Gnosticism. The spiritual seed must all be brought
back again from earthly degradation; none can fail
of being so, first or last. It may be destined to
numerous transmigrations; but the spirit must finally
be wafted upward to the eternal Fulness<note place='foot'>I. vi. 1, 2.</note>. Again,
the spiritual pride and presumption of the genuine
Antinomian is a very observable trait: his speaking
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
of all as carnal who do not adopt his scheme; his
placing religion not in holiness, but in <emph>knowing</emph> the
truth; his assumption of superior illumination; his
declarations that none but those specially favoured
<emph>are capable</emph> of knowing the truth; all this is merely a
repetition of Gnosticism. The Gnostic called himself
spiritual, and the Churchman carnal<note place='foot'>I. v. 2.</note>; he was the
elect and perfect, and the orthodox the ignorant and
simple<note place='foot'>I. vi. 4. III. xv. 2.</note>; he derived his very name from his making
<emph>knowledge</emph> paramount to all other things<note place='foot'>I. vi. 1.</note>; he declared
that none were capable of receiving his scheme but
the spiritual seed<note place='foot'>I. vi. 1.</note>; that to others good works were
necessary and useful<note place='foot'>I. vi. 2, 4.</note>, but that their lot, however
praiseworthy, could never be the same as that of the
elect<note place='foot'>I. vii. 1.</note>. So, again, the abuse of the doctrine of justification
by faith is as early as those times. They
declared that faith and love was the sum of their
religion<note place='foot'>I. xxv. 5.</note>; that the law might be a restraint suited
to inferior natures, but that to them it would be a
degradation to submit their minds to its yoke; and
that, in fact, whatever acts they might commit, it
was impossible for them either to be polluted by
those acts or to fail of salvation<note place='foot'>I. vi. 2.</note>. Who would not
suppose that the modern ultra-Calvinist was the
speaker? So again, at that time, as in these days
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
these tenets were not always taken up as a cloak
for licentiousness. Saturninus and Tatian were
extremely correct in their lives; and Valentinus was
not accused of any peculiar immorality: indeed, he
long continued nominally a member of the Church,
which, if his conduct had been flagitious, he could
not have done. If they despised the restraints of
the moral law, they probably supposed, like Toplady
and others, that they had higher principles, which
would lead them to greater heights of purity: or
they were men of a speculative turn, who took up
Gnosticism as a theory, without any disposition to
make that practical use of it which others did,
merely because they were not persons of warm passions.
Indeed, if we may judge from a fragment
preserved by Clement of Alexandria, Valentinus was
rather a mystic in his religion<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> II. 20. § 114.</note>.
</p>

<p>
There are two or three features in which the
Gnostics were the forerunners of a very different
class of errors. Transubstantiation no doubt arose in
time by a natural depravation of the true doctrine
of the Eucharist, through the desire of defining that
which Scripture and primitive tradition had left
undefined. But it is curious that a hint of it should
have been struck out by Marcus, one of the magical
Gnostics, who, amongst other arts of legerdemain,
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
hit upon the idea of bringing down into the wine
and water <emph>the blood of the supernal grace</emph>, by means of
an invocation<note place='foot'>I. xiii. 2.</note>. It is equally curious to read in the
account of Carpocrates and his disciples, that they
asserted that Pilate had procured a likeness of Jesus
Christ to be taken, and that they set his image
amongst those of Pythagoras, and Plato, and Aristotle
and the rest, and decked it with chaplets, and paid
to it the selfsame honours which the heathen paid
to their idols<note place='foot'>I. xxv. 6.</note>. Nor is it less remarkable that the
Gnostics in general, when refuted by the Scriptures,
should have spoken in disparagement of them (as I
have already pointed out) in terms singularly corresponding
with those sometimes made use of by
Roman controversialists: <q>They turn to accuse the
Scriptures, as though they were not correct, nor of
authority; and say that they are at variance with
themselves, <emph>neither can the truth be discovered from
them by those who are ignorant of</emph> <hi rend='smallcaps'>their</hi> <emph>tradition</emph><note place='foot'>III. ii. 1.</note>.</q>
Coincidences of this kind are at least curious; and
the further we search the more clearly will it appear
that the germs of all subsequent errors appeared in
very early times.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: Obvious printer's errors have been corrected.]
</p>
</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
